

========== Factors_which_influence_Foreign_Pol.pdf ==========

Polish Journal of Political Science
Dolly Bhardwaj
Faculty of Journalism and Political Science, University of Warsaw
Factors which influence Foreign Policy of Bhutan
Abstract
This article discusses the factors which play a major role in
shaping the foreign policy of Bhutan. How Bhutan, a tiny
landlocked country and the youngest democracy in the world
gets influence by the behavior and interest of the neighboring
big powers: India and China. This article will look into many
facets of Bhutan to understand its foreign policy-making, such as
Location, Political institutions, Security, Economy and Gross
National Happiness.
Keywords: Foreign Policy of Bhutan, Foreign Policy Factors,
Land-locked States, Buffer States, Gross National Happiness,
Bhutan, South Asia, Weak States, India, China, Bhutan between
India and China
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 25
Polish Journal of Political Science
Introduction
Bhutan, also called Druk Yul, is a Himalayan Buddhist Kingdom in South Asia
located between India and China. Bhutan is a small landlocked country with
limited economic scope and military power. It is situated in the eastern
Himalayas and borders by 470 kilometers to the north and northwest Tibet
(China’s Xizang Autonomous Region), and by 670 kilometers India. To the west
Bhutan shares its border with India’s state of Sikkim, West Bengal to the
southwest, Assam to the south and southwest, Arunachala Pradesh to the east.
Sikkim, an eighty-eight-kilometer-wide territory, divides Bhutan from Nepal,
while West Bengal separates Bhutan from Bangladesh by only sixty kilometers.
In World’s country comparison, Bhutan is the 137 largest country with a total
area of 38,394 sq. km, which is entirely landmass.1 Bhutan's capital city,
Thimpu, is centrally located towards the country's western border with India.
Bhutan was never colonized unlike its neighboring countries. Bhutan was also
spared percussion from the two World Wars and the Cold War, which led to
major instability and alignments in case of other countries.
This paper aims to study the role of Bhutan as a buffer state between the two
emerging world powers of India and China. In the study of Bhutan, its
smallness is irrelevant as its importance is enhanced due to the geopolitical
and geostrategic location by being the buffer state between India and China.
Bhutan’s case is a very unique one as Bhutan was in a self-imposed isolation
and completely cut off from the remaining world for many centuries until
around 1960, and it is the youngest democracy in the world. Study and
researches about this country has been neglected by scholars for many years
mainly due to the isolation, remoteness and smallness of the country except a
handful of researches on the bilateral friendship between Bhutan and India. As
the world debates shifting of the world power to Asia from the West, the role
1 Central Intelligence Agency, „The World Factbook”. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-
world-factbook/geos/bt.html
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 26
Polish Journal of Political Science
of this small kingdom will play a very important role in balancing the world
power.
The friendship between the world’s smallest and the largest democracy,
Bhutan and India, is evident and talked over since many decades. Bhutan has
always kept its distance from China after the Tibet issue, but as China is
becoming the fastest growing world power, Bhutan can no longer ignore and
have to play the role of a balancer more cautiously now.
This paper focuses on the period between 2008-2015, when the country had
held its first and subsequently the second National Assembly Elections and this
is the time when the country was on the threshold of its transition. Being a
small country, Bhutan has many sensitive issues. However the most sensitive
issue for the Bhutanese society has always been the preservation of its
sovereignty, territorial integrity and its security.
Factors and Circumstances shaping Bhutan’s Foreign Policy
The role of Foreign Policy is very important for the peace and progress of
every country in today’s World. Every nation strive to be self-reliant and for
the nation to be self-reliant, the nation has to play along and depend on other
nations. Foreign Policy is the set of principles or guidelines adopted by the
nations to give a meaning and direction to its behavior in the international
relations. Foreign Policy is also an instrument, or an activity of the state with
which it aims to fulfil and serve the national interest and goals in the
international arena. There are numerous explanations and interpretations of
Foreign Policy by the various political scientist.
Rosenau defines “Foreign Policy as a systematic decision-making by
constitutional authorized officials of individual states. Their intention is to
maintain, or change the state of affairs in the international system in line with
an objective, or objectives they or their superiors have chosen.”2 According to
2 Political Science and Public Policy, edited by James N. Rosenau (Chicago 1968). 222
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 27
Polish Journal of Political Science
George Modelski, “Foreign Policy involves all activities of a nation by which
that nation is trying to change the behavior of other nations and to adjust its
own behavior in the international environment.”3 He also adds that Foreign
Policy always aims at successfully changing the behavior of other nations.
Crabb defines Foreign Policy in a very simple way, which is also one of the
most effective definitions: ‘National objectives’ that should be the goal and the
‘means’ that should be used in the process of attaining this goal. The
interaction between objectives and means is the essence of ‘statesmanship’, and
of ‘foreign policy’.4 Hadfield and Dunne define “foreign policy as the strategy,
or approach chosen by the national government to achieve its goals in its
relations with external entities.”5
1. Geo-strategic Location
Geography is the foremost and primary determinant of Bhutan’s foreign policy.
The location, size and shape of the country are the main geographical factors
influencing the foreign policy of Bhutan. Bhutan is a strategic buffer state
between two nuclear giants, India and China. Its rugged mountain terrain and
a landlocked location in the Himalayas have certain implications on the world
view and the security perception in Bhutan. UN - OHRLLS (United Nations
Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries,
Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States), which
supports the special needs of smaller nations, describes “lack of territorial
access to the sea, remoteness and isolation from world markets and high
transit cost continue to impose serious constraints on the overall socio-
economic development of landlocked developing countries. Their sea-borne
trade unavoidably depends on transit through other countries. Additional
border crossings and long distance from the market substantially increase the
3 George Modelski, A theory of Foreign Policy, Princeton University, 1962
4 Cecil V. Crabb Jr., American Foreign Policy in the Nuclear Age, New York 1988, 1
5 Steve Smith, Amelia Hadfield, Tim Dunne (eds.), Foreign Policy – Theories, Actors, Cases, Oxford
2008, 12
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 28
Polish Journal of Political Science
total expenses for the transport services”6 as a primary restraint faced by
landlocked states.
The Kingdom of Bhutan at a first glimpse would not seem to be a country that
would influence heavily the regional power calculation. A country, whose size
and landmass is smaller than Switzerland and ranks 136th in the Countries of
the World by Area7, ranks 163th of Countries in the World ranked by 2014
population8. This tiny landlocked Himalayan country however become
increasingly influential strategically to both India and China. The reason for the
increase in the importance of Bhutan to these two giants is not because of
untapped mineral riches, or a large consumer class. It is because of three
geographical features which make Bhutan a very important strategic location
for India and China.
Firstly, Bhutan does not have any access to either the sea or any other third
country without passing through either India’s or China’s land or airspace.
Secondly Bhutan controls numerous historical trade routes between the two
nations, India and China. Thirdly, Bhutan is an important buffer for the
Siliguri Corridor, also known as the ‘chicken’s neck’, which measures twenty-
five kilometers at the narrowest point. Through this narrow road run the roads
and rail lines between India’s North east and the remaining parts of India.9
Bhutan followed a self-imposed isolation policy and was largely cut off from
the rest of the world until the 1950s, even television was not legalized until
1999. As Bhutan started opening up in the recent years to the outside world,
the country finds itself engaged in a cautious but considerable diplomatic
battle between India and China. The core of this issue is nothing else than
Bhutan’s territorial disputes with China.
6 http://unohrlls.org/about-lldcs/
7 http://www.nationsonline.org/oneworld/countries_by_area.htm
8 http://www.worldometers.info/world-population/population-by-country/
9 Protracted Contest „John W Garver” P. 96
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 29
Polish Journal of Political Science
Map 1: India’s troubled northeast
There are three territorial disputes between Bhutan and China10. Both China
and Bhutan claim the 495 square kilometer area of Pasamlung and Jakarlung
valleys as part of their respective countries in the central sector and 269
square kilometer area in the western sector11. The Pasamlung and the Jakarlun
valleys are of interest to China because of its closeness to Tibet but China
envy Doklam Plateau the most. India is deeply worried because of China’s
claim to these areas and India’s Centre for Land Warfare Studies
(CLAWS) describes the strategic value of the region: “The Doklam Plateau lies
immediately east of Indian defenses in Sikkim. Chinese occupation of Doklam
would turn the flank of Indian defenses completely. This piece of dominating
ground not only has a commanding view of the Chumbi Valley but also
overlooks the Silguri Corridor further to the east.”12
2. Political Institutions
There are many definitions of political institutions by various political scientist.
Peters and Pierre define political institutions as “it refers not only to formal
political organizations such as political parties and parliament, but also to
10 Medha Bisht, “Sino-Bhutan Boundary Negotiations”, IDSA Comment, 19.1.2010, - See more at:
http://www.southasiaanalysis.org/node/1747#sthash.jtpZj9E3.dpuf
11 Himalayan Frontiers of India: K Warikoo P.151
12 Prakash Katoch, Dealing with Doklam, March 2013, Centre for Land Warfare Studies,
http://www.claws.in/985/dealing-with-doklam-prakash-katoch.html
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 30
Polish Journal of Political Science
informal constraints such as customs, ideals, guideline sand actions”. David
Wiens, 2012, emphasizes that these formal and informal rules establish and
stabilize roles. Moreover, Garret & Lange, 1995 expressed that “there is no
consensus amongst theorists of what makes an institution political”. Based on
the Stanford Encyclopedia’s definition of Social institutions, Political institutions
can also be de defined in the same way. Social institutions are defined by
the Stanford Encyclopedia as „sets of rules and norms that organize human
activities within a society”. Similarly political institutions can be defined as “sets
of rules and norms that organize political activity”. These institutions do not
need to be drafted or penned down, but they should be imposed, or socially
accepted.
Monarchy
Figure 1: Monarch and Reign13
Source: http://www.bhutandnc.com/bhutantodayjan06.htm
13 http://www.bhutandnc.com/bhutantodayjan06.htm
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 31
Polish Journal of Political Science
The smallest Himalayan country in South Asia, the Kingdom of Bhutan came
out after one hundred years of rule by absolute monarchy as a parliamentary
democracy with the constitutional head as the monarch on the top. Bhutan was
in self-isolation for many decades, until it came under the rule of the fourth
king of Wangchuck dynasty, King Jigme Singye Wangchuk in 1972 after the
death of his father, King Jigme Dorji Wangchuk. The Fourth King has been
vested with absolute powers during most of his reign and he was not under
any internal, or external pressure to begin the path to political modernization.
Bhutan, with the support of India, was living in peace and tranquility during
that time and could have continued to live the same way for several more
years. Changes in the political system in any country happen usually due to the
result of long and painful social and political struggle conducted in the event of
economic underdevelopment or oppression. Example of such a political change
was witnessed by Nepal, one of the neighboring country of Bhutan.
The wind of change which blew through Bhutan was different, however, since
King Jigme Singye Wangchuk was a genuine reformer and he was keen to
follow his own path to reach an objective that has been the crucial lead of his
regime, leading Bhutan on the way to modernization and decentralization. This
path then in the course of time would have lead to participation and
democratization, and transforming an hereditary absolute system of
government into a constitutional monarchy. His institutional reforms have been
organized under three major headings: decentralization, devolution of his own
powers, and good governance, paving the way for the constitution. On the
contrary and unlike the practice of most monarchical systems in the world,
modesty has been the heraldry of King Singye Wangcguk, whose style of living
and ruling has been as close to the people as it can be in such a regime. His
decision to give full executive powers to an elected cabinet, and to submit
himself to a vote of confidence give manifestation about his personal vision:
"The time has now come to promote greater people's participation in the
decision making process. Our country must be ensured to always have a
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 32
Polish Journal of Political Science
system of government which enjoys the mandate of the people, provides and
efficient governance, and also has an inbuilt mechanism of checks and
balances to safeguard our national interest and security".14 In 1999, the Jigme
Singye Wangchuk created a body of Council of Ministers called the “Lhengye
Zhutshong” and the Druk Gyalpo as the Head of State. Lhengye Zhutsong
exercised the executive powers, while the government and the former Grand
National Assembly was vested with the legislative powers.
On December 17, 2005, King Jigme Singye Wangchuk announced to a stunned
nation that the first general elections would be held in 2008, and he would
abdicate the throne in favor of his eldest son, the crown prince. King Jigme
Khesar Namgyel Wangchuk took the throne on December 14, 2006 upon his
father’s abdication. Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck was adorned with
Bhutan’s Raven Crown at an ornate coronation ceremony in Thimpu on
November 6, 2008, becoming the world’s youngest reigning monarch and head
of the newest democracy.15 The young king began his reign by overseeing
the democratization of his country by presiding over the last sessions of
the parliament where electoral laws, land reform and other important issues
were deliberated16. He stated that the responsibility of this generation of
Bhutanese was to ensure the success of democracy. He traveled extensively to
explain and discuss the Draft Constitution of Bhutan with the people, and to
encourage participation in the upcoming democratic exercises. He continues
such visits, speaking mainly to the youth of Bhutan on the need for Bhutanese
to strive for greater standards in education, business, civil service and the need
for people of a small country to work harder than those of others. 17
He signed a new treaty of friendship with India in February 2007, replacing the
treaty of 1949.18 Number of government actions were initiated by the new King,
14 Kuensel, August 29, 1998.
15 Bhutan Foreign Policy and government guide, P 65
16 "Last National Assembly session begins". Bhutan Observer. 19 January 2008. Retrieved 6
November 2008.
17 "His Majesty to attend mock election in Dungkhar". Kuensel. 22 April 2007. Retrieved 6
November 2008.
18 Bhutan and India sign new treaty". BBC. 8 February 2007. Retrieved 6 November 2008.
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 33
Polish Journal of Political Science
King Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuk with a prospect to strengthen the
system in the establishment for the democratic changes in 2008. The first
elected Parliament adopted the Constitution of Bhutan was adopted on 18 July
2008. His first landmark project after his formal coronation was launching the
National Cadastral Resurvey in March 2009, aimed at resolving long-standing
land issues of excess land that affects every Bhutanese household.19
The National Assembly (The Tshongdu)
In 1943, King Jigme Dorji Wangchuk established the National Assembly. King
Jigme Dorji Wangchuk instituted to established the National Assembly to
promote political awareness among the his people and also to allow them a
greater say in the country’s functioning. Any gathering held to discuss the
common interest is termed as “Jomdu” in Bhutan and termed as “Tshongdu” if
the gathering is in large numbers. Hence, the name, “The Tshingdu” for the
“The National Assembly”. The primary responsibility of the National Assembly
are to execute laws, approve senior appointments in the government and
advise on all matters of national importance.
There are three reasons for the establishment of the National Assembly. Firstly
The representatives of the people shall assemble to articulate the issues of the
people and provide solutions to their problems. Secondly, The Assembly will
come up with plans and ideas to benefit the development of the kingdom, and
strengthen it. Thirdly, The Assembly will record accounts of revenues in the
Kingdom as well as annual expenditure incurred for the government, and for
development purposes.20
The National Assembly of Bhutan was unicameral representative body until
the introduction of parliamentary democracy which brought Bhutan its
bicameral Parliament (the National Council and the National Assembly). It had
been the highest decision-making body in the country. The 1954 constitution of
the National Assembly had that His Majesty reserved the right to amend all its
19 "A promise is kept". Kuenselonline.com. 14 March 2009.
20 http://www.nab.gov.bt/en/about/parliament-history
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 34
Polish Journal of Political Science
decisions. However, in 1968 it was decided that the decisions of the National
Assembly would be final and binding from then on, and not even His Majesty
would be allowed to amend them. Should he have had misgivings about the
soundness of the Assembly’s decisions, he would have address the Assembly to
propose to reconsider the decisions. King proposed to make the National
Assembly a sovereign institution and the Assembly members endorsed it.
Strengthening the National Assembly as a supreme body, the king introduced
the vote of no confidence in monarchy despite the Assembly’s outright
rejection in three consecutive sessions. The introduction of vote of no
confidence in the Monarchy meant the King surrendered his veto power and
vested all the legislative power in the National Assembly. In 1998, the Fourth
King empowered the National Assembly to elect the council of ministers who
would be entrusted with the responsibility to take care of the governance
affairs of the country. The Assembly was also empowered to develop a
mechanism for registering a vote of confidence in King. The National Assembly
was formally dissolved in 2007 in the lead-up to Bhutan’s historic transition to
parliamentary democracy in 2007 – exactly after 100 years of progressive
monarchical rule21.
The current National Assembly is the second one since the Kingdom of Bhutan
transitioned to parliamentary democracy in 2007. The first democratically
elected National Assembly completed its tenure in 2013. The House is one of
the Chambers of Bhutan’s bicameral Parliament. There are two political parties
in the National Assembly – People’s Democratic Party (PDP) and Druk
Phuensum Tshogpa (DPT). Elections to the National Assembly take place in
two tiers - primary round and the general election. Political parties registered
with the Election Commission of Bhutan contest the primary round. The two
political parties that get the highest and the second highest number of total
votes cast are qualified to run for the seats in the National Assembly in the
general round of election. The party that gets the maximum seats forms the
21 http://www.nab.gov.bt/en/about/parliament-history
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 35
Polish Journal of Political Science
government and the other takes the opposition bench. Today, there are 47
members in the House. PDP is the ruling party and DPT the opposition. The
Constitution has a provision that the House shall have a maximum of 55
members, elected from each dzongkhag (district) in proportion to its
population. However, no dzongkhag shall have less than two members or
more than seven members. The National Assembly has the legislative,
oversight and representational mandates.22
The Vision of the National Assembly of Bhutan is “To achieve the Kingdom
of Bhutan’s overarching goal of Gross National Happiness enshrined in
the Constitution through an inclusive and a vibrant democracy”. The
Mission is “To effectively carry out legislative, scrutiny, oversight and
representational functions to fulfill the aspirations of the Bhutanese
people”. And the core Values of National Assembly of Bhutan are : (i)
Professional values & Integrity: We the Members and Secretariat staff of the
National Assembly will maintain and promote the highest level of professional
values and integrity in our endeavor to promote the National Assembly as an
epitome of democratic institution and to serve the people. (ii) Accountability &
Result-oriented: We will be judicious in using resources and perform our
duties to achieve commendable results. (iii) Ethical values: Integrity, honesty,
empathy, transparency, impartiality, probity, and neutrality will be the
hallmark of our profession and responsibility. (iv) Democratic values: The
National Assembly will champion promoting and deepening democracy by
serving the people of Bhutan and abide by the Constitution of the Kingdom
both in letter and spirit. (v) Consensus building: The National Assembly will
work toward promoting national unity through consensus building in our
unique democracy.23
22 http://www.nab.gov.bt/en/about/national-assembly
23 http://www.nab.gov.bt/en/about/mission-vision
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 36
Polish Journal of Political Science
The Royal Advisory Council (Lodoi Tsokde)
In 1965, King Jigme Dorji Wangchuck established the “The Royal Advisory
Council” or “Lodoi Tsokde”. The council consists of nine members and of the
nine people, six members represent the people, two members represents the
clergy and king nominated one member. The head of the Council is the
Chairman called kalon. The kalon represents the government and is granted
the rank of a minister. This council became the highest advisory body in the
Bhutan and main task of the council was to advised and assist the King and the
ministers in the governance matters. The term of the council is for three years.
Functions and responsibilities of Royal Advisory Council24:
1. The Royal Advisory Council shall be primarily responsible for
promoting and safeguarding the trust, confidence and the harmonious
relations existing between the Government and the People of the
Kingdom. In this regard, should the Council or anyone of it's members
become aware of situations or threats that may undermine the security,
peace and stability of the Kingdom, such information should be
immediately brought to the attention of His Majesty the King.
2. The Royal Advisory Council shall be the guardian of the policies, laws
and resolutions passed by the National Assembly and it shall ensure
their faithful implementation by the government and the people.
3. The Royal Advisory Council shall endeavor to ascertain whether the
national policies, plans and programs are being implemented by the
government and the people. Should the Royal Advisory Council, in its
judgement, find that this is not the case, it shall bring the matter to the
24 http://oag.gov.bt/wp-content/uploads/2011/02/Rules-Regulation-of-the-Royal-Advisory-Council-1993-
English.pdf
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 37
Polish Journal of Political Science
attention of His Majesty the King, and thereafter, if necessary, to the
attention of the Lhengyal Shungtsog and the National Assembly.
4. The Royal Advisory Council shall discharge all its functions and
responsibilities without fear or favor and with complete impartiality,
integrity, loyalty and dedication.
5. The Royal Advisory Council shall render advice to His MAJESTY THE
King with utmost dedication, loyalty and sincerity keeping in view the
interests of the Kingdom and the wellbeing of the people.
6. Besides participation in the policy and legislative bodies such as the
National Assembly and the Lhengyal Shungtsog, the Royal Advisory
Council as and when desired by His Majesty the King, shall attend
meetings dealing with issues of national importance.
7. Should the Royal Advisory Council find any action or activity of any
person or organization including that of the King himself, to be
detrimental to the interests of the Kingdom and the People, they shall,
without any hesitation whatsoever, report such matters to His Majesty
the King and thereafter, if necessary, to the Lhengyal Shungtsog and the
National Assembly.
King Jigme Singye Wangchuck further strengthened the position of the Royal
Advisory Council in 1984 as the king felt that the council lacked the necessary
clout to carry out their important responsibilities even though the council has
the authority to advise the king and watch over the performance of the
government. The most addition is the inclusion of a clause that states that “if
any person, including His Majesty the King, does anything harmful to the
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 38
Polish Journal of Political Science
interest of the Kingdom and the people, the Royal Advisory Council without
surpassing such matters and free of fear from the quarter shall bring it to the
attention of His Majesty the King and, if necessary, even report it to the
Cabinet and The National Assembly”. The National Assembly strongly objected
to this clause empowering the Royal Advisory Council to report against the
King. The Assembly felt that it was a violation of traditional values and that it
undermined the sacred principles of loyalty and devotion to the throne. His
Majesty the King however insisted that this clause was of great importance
and was very necessary as no one can predict or guarantee the actions and
sense of responsibility to the nation of future rulers.25
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Foreign policy formulation is the most critical task for a country like Bhutan.
However, during the first four decades of the 20th century, the foreign policy of
Bhutan was not a complex issue for the Kingdom as the basic operating
principles of Bhutan’s external relations were set by the events surrounding
the British Younghusband Expedition into Tibet (1903-05) and the treaty
between Bhutan and British India signed in 1910. In Foreign policy terms, then,
British India constituted the only potentially complicating factor for the newly-
established monarchy in Bhutan in 1907, and it is not surprising that King
Ugyen Dorji made a satisfactory accommodation with the British his first order
of Business. The British recognized Bhutan’s internal sovereignty and did not
insist upon the establishment of a “Residency” in Bhutan as they had in Nepal
and Sikkim. The only qualification imposed on Bhutan’s sovereignty was the
clause in the 1910 treaty under which the Bhutanese “agreed to be guided by
the advice” of the British on the foreign policy matters.26
After India’s independence from British in 1947, the government of India
succeeded the role of the British and the Himalayan Kingdoms of Nepal,
25 Bhutan Country Study Guide, Volume 1 strategic information and developments, p.75
26 Pacific Affairs, Leo E. Rose, p.192
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 39
Polish Journal of Political Science
Sikkim, Tibet and Bhutan had reached an agreement with India. Nepal, Sikkim
and Tibet signed a “standstill agreement” under which these three kingdoms
would continue functioning the same way as they had been previously until a
new treaty is negotiated. Bhutan and India did not formally sign the standstill
agreement, however they acted as if they had signed it. In the summer of 1949,
the negotiation for a new Indo-Bhutanese treaty commenced and the treaty
was signed on August 8, 1949. Under this treaty Bhutan’s independence was
recognized but the treaty included the clause from the 1910 treaty under which
the Royal Government of Bhutan agreed to accept Indian guidance on foreign
policy27. The new treaty would have had stiffer clause had it been signed after
1950. By 1950 Indians became acutely disturbed by the expressed
determination of the new Communist regime in China to “reunite” some
territories with the Chinese Motherland. India’s heightened concern was
reflected in the secret letters attached to the 1950 Treaty of Peace and
Friendship with Nepal and in the retention of Sikkim as a “protectorate” in the
1951 Treaty with Sikkim28.
In October 1950, the Chinese offensive was launched on the eastern frontier
against Tibet and another Chinese force moved into Western Tibet from
Sinkiang, which is a territory claimed by India. This event convinced the then
Prime Minister of India, Jawaharlal Nehru, of the requirement to assert clearly
India’s defense policy on the northern frontier. On December 6, 1950 in a
statement to Parliament, Jawaharlal Nehru declared : “From time immemorial
the Himalayas have provided us with magnificent frontiers. We cannot allow
the barriers to be penetrated because it is also the principal barrier to India.
Therefore, much as we appreciated the independence of Nepal, we cannot
allow anything to go wrong in Nepal, or permit that barrier to be crossed, or
weekend, because that would be a risk to our own security”29. Nehru decided
to visit Bhutan in the fall of 1958 to discuss the situation with the king and he
27 Bhutan Foreign Policy and Government Guide, p. 67
28 Pacific Affairs, Leo E. Rose, p.193-194
29 Jawaharlal Nehru Speeches (1949-53), Publication Division, Government of India, 3rd cl., 1963, p.252
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 40
Polish Journal of Political Science
strongly urged the Royal Government to modify its isolation policy, at least to
the extent of accepting Indian economic aid. Bhutan’s immediate response was
non-committal despite its own increasing concern over the developments in the
north since Bhutan still hoped to avoid any involvement in the dangerous big
power confrontation emerging at that time. In March 1959, a massive popular
uprising against the Chinese in Lhasa was finally suppressed after several days
of hard-fighting, but by this time virtually all of Central Tibet was in revolt,
and the Dalai Lama with thousands of his followers fled to India. The Chinese
incursions coincided with increasing pressure from New Delhi directed
towards the “opening” of Bhutan and the establishment of a substantial Indian
“presence” in the country. Bhutan appeared to be one of the most vulnerable
points in the Indian security system.30
During this time, the Bhutanese Prime Minister J.P. Dorji acted as a
representative of Bhutan in India and in international affairs until his
assassination in 1964. The 1960s were a dangerous period for Bhutan both
externally and internally, but by the end of the decade the most serious
problems had been effectively handled, if not necessarily resolved, by the king
and the corps of experienced administrators upon whom he has come to
depend. Prospects of the 1970s thus had appeared much brighter. Even the
King’s death in mid-1972, and the succession of the 17-year-old Crown Prince
to the throne, did not result in a major political crisis as would certainly had
been the case a few years earlier31.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs was established in 1972 due to some constraints
that arose, such as importance to have a greater acceptance and recognition of
Bhutan’s national identity, as well as the debate on Bhutan’s admission to the
United Nations. India proposed Bhutan’s admission to the international
organization and a resolution to this effect was quickly approved without
opposition. Bhutan’s formal admission at the 1971 Fall UN Session was
universally welcomed in Bhutan as a major achievement. Bhutan was provided
30 Pacific Affairs, Leo E. Rose, p.195-196
31 Pacific Affairs, Leo E. Rose, p.201-202
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 41
Polish Journal of Political Science
with a second channel of communication to the outside world, in some respects
more important than the mission in New Delhi, which functioned in an Indian.
Both the missions are of course in normal contact with other foreign
delegations, including those of China, Pakistan, Nepal and other neighboring
Asian states with which Bhutan does not have any direct bilateral relations yet.
Bhutan’s dependence upon India as its intermediary with the outside world
was thus substantially reduced. Therefore establishment of two missions
abroad and the need to maintain contacts with a growing number of foreign
countries led to formation of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in 1972. For the
first time there has been a government institution responsible for foreign
policy, a task that had been managed previously on an ad hoc, non-
professional basis.32
Lyonpo Dawa Tsering was appointed as the first Foreign Minister of Bhutan
and the current Foreign Minister, Lyonpo Damcho Dorji is the 7th older of this
office33. Since then Bhutan has established diplomatic relations with 52
countries and the European Union34. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Bhutan
plays a significant role in various regional and international organizations,
namely: UN, NAM, SAARC and ESCAP. The foreign office of Bhutan also
chaired some important sessions in the forum of NAM, ESCAP and SAARC.
Religion and Tradition
Religion can legitimize governments as well as specific policies followed by
governments. Legitimacy can be defined as “the normative belief by an actor
that a rule or institution ought to be obeyed”35. Religion can be a very
important tool while convincing others that your policy preference is
legitimate. Religion is certainly not the only source of legitimacy and there are
32 Pacific Affairs, Leo E. Rose, p.202-203
33 http://rulers.org/fm1.html
34 http://www.mfa.gov.bt/about-the-ministry
35 “After Anarchy” Legitimacy & Power in the United Security Council, Ian Hurd, 2007, Princeton
University Press. p.381
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 42
Polish Journal of Political Science
some set bounds on what is considered legitimate and what is not. For
instance, self-defense is near-universally considered legitimate and genocide is
not. However, there is a substantial middle ground where debate is possible
over the legitimacy, or illegitimacy of an action, or policy. It is in this grey zone
that is up to policy makers to convince others – including their constituents,
other policy makers from their own state, policy makers from other states, and
the population of other states – of the legitimacy of their actions and policies36.
According to John C. Turner, while “the role of religious legitimacy has rarely
been discussed in the context of international politics, it is often discussed in
the context of domestic politics. Until a few centuries ago, it was taken for
granted that religion was the basis for the legitimacy of the state itself, with the
Church, as God’s agent, granting rulers the right to rule”. According to Clifford
Geertz, “in this modern age, this is not entirely the case as the state’s
legitimacy resting on multiple sources of legitimacy but “a strong residual
element of religion continues to exist and continues to perform basic
legitimizing functions”. According to Mark Juergensmeyer, many argue that
this legitimizing function of religion is becoming increasingly important as
governments guided by secular ideologies are seen as failing to provide basic
needs like: security, economic well-being, and social justice. This is applicable
with regard to foreign policy because mostly all politics, including international
politics, is operated locally as the policy makers operate within state
governments and to varying degree, depending on the nature of that state’s
regime, need to convince domestic constituencies, and other policy makers in
their own states, that the course of action they take is correct and legitimate.
They also need to convince them to support, or at least to acquiesce to, those
policies. Thus, if religion is a potent source of legitimacy in local politics, it can
be the same for international politics37.
The Kingdom of Bhutan is a Buddhist country as the state religion of Bhutan is
“Vajrayana Buddhism”. Bhutan is the only country where Vajrayana Buddhism
36 Jeffrey Haynes (ed.), Routledge Handbook of Religion and Politics, p.277.
37 Routledge handbook of religion and politics, edited by Jeffrey Haynes, p.278
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 43
Polish Journal of Political Science
is practiced in the world. Buddhists comprise two-thirds to three-quarters of its
population.38 In Bhutan, religion and monarchy cannot be separated as the King
is not only the head of the state but he is also the protector of the Buddhist
faith and culture. This can be understood by looking at the members of “Royal
Advisory Council”, where two members represent the clergy. According to
B.C. Upreti, foreign policy in Bhutan is an important instrument of increasing
the Gross National Happiness, the alternative model of development that
Bhutan has pursued over the last two decades.
A balanced foreign policy is required to attain the objectives of Gross National
Happiness. This intriguing idea does not, however, appear to manifest itself in
anything more profound than a statement regarding the importance of
attempting to engage with globalization and foreign influences in such a way as
not to undermine Bhutan’s existing Buddhist culture while increasing the
country’s economic and human development. On the other hand, Leo E. Rose
holds the view that the national and international affairs of Bhutan are not
much influenced by the institution of religion, or religious groups. According to
him, the vested interests among the elite are very influential in the formulation
of Bhutan's foreign policy.39 Every Bhutanese life is directed by rituals and
religion, and performing religious duties and traditions is not only a private
matter but it is also a part of the public life of Bhutan. To ensure that
Buddhism stays vividly alive, one son from every family usually attends a
monastic school.40
A monarchical mandate was declared in 1989 in which “Driglam Namzha”
formed part of the official theme of the sixth Five-Year Plan (1987-1992).
Driglam Namzha is the medieval social code of peaceful and obedient
conduct, and understood abstractly sets “the principles of Bhutanese customs
and traditions”, or more concretely the “national dress and language”. Driglam
38 "International Religious Freedom Report 2007 - Bhutan". U.S. Department of State. 2007-09-14.
Retrieved 2008-01-06.
39 Pacific Affairs, Leo E. Rose, p.84-88
40 http://www.bhutan.com/religion
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 44
Polish Journal of Political Science
Namzha was introduced in order to make up a unique Bhutanese national
identity on the basis of the culture. The introduction of the policy of Driglam
Namzha in Bhutan indicates the importance of the influence of religious and
traditional institutions in the foreign-policy making of Bhutan.
3. South Asia Security Complex
The international system has experienced a dynamic shift at the end of the
Cold War. The comprehensive bipolar structure of the international security
environment crumbled with the demise of the Soviet Union. Many international
relations scholars and scientist have sought to explain the dynamics of this
transformation, its principal features and what it means for the future of
security affairs in the international system.
The importance of regional security was emphasized in the Third World
Countries post the Cold War. The emphasis can be seen mainly in three areas.
The first one is that regional security has become the most significant issue in
the super powers’ dialogue agenda. Secondly, regional wars and conflicts in the
third world countries have apparently become the chief threats to the
international system. Thirdly, there has been an increasing demand for
regional security arrangements in the third world countries.
Regional Security Complex Theory
In order to define regional security complex theory, one should have a clear
idea of definition of “region” with reference to the security concept. Barry
Buzan defines a region as “a distinct and significant sub-system of security
relations that exists among a set of states who have been locked into close
geographic proximity with one another.”41
Regional security complex theory emphasizes the inter-subjective construction
of security issues by the state actors while emphasizing geographic proximity
41 Barry Buzan,People, States & Fear. An Agenda for international Security studies in the post – cold
war era. 1991. Harvester Wheatsheaf. P 158
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 45
Polish Journal of Political Science
as the foremost generator of security concerns42. Buzan also identifies four
primary features of a region security. Firstly, a security region must be
comprised of two or more states. Secondly, the states must be in relative
geographic proximity to one another, and thirdly, the security interdependence
within the region is more pronounced than one on the global level. Regional
analysis is considered as the practical way to understand world events because
region is the intercessor between the state and the international system.
Contentions that are securitized by region and that affect regional stability are
projected onto both the state and international level. The interdependence of
security is more intensified on a regional level than it is on a global level.
Hence, most of the sovereign states generally lack the ability to project power
much beyond their own regional sphere.
The traditional international relations theory argues that the global system is
composed of individual units and that all of these units possess the same
power to affect systemic dynamics. Hence, the relation among the units is
defined by anarchy and war is an ever present reality. However since the
World War II, this is no longer strictly the case. An array of multilateral
institutions have spurted and sought to reject the Clauswitzian notion that war
is a continuation of politics. The bottom-line ambition of these organizations
has been the collective quest for creating awareness that war is not an
unpalatable mechanism for actions within the international system
South Asia as defined in the domain of South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation (SAARC), namely India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Nepal, Bhutan, Sri
Lanka, the Maldives, and Afghanistan. Although Myanmar has been geo-
politically and historically part of the region, it is not included into South Asia
as it is not part of the regional association. The U.S. and Russia are defined as
important external powers, and China is defined as an “important potential
power of South Asia,” mainly because it is an immediate neighbor of South
Asia. The region of South Asia continues to be one of the most important crisis
42 Regions and Powers : the structure of international security, Buzan and Waever Cambridge
University Press, 2003. 45-46
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 46
Polish Journal of Political Science
regions in the 21st century. The region is defined by an intertwined web of
new and old security risks. This region is very fragile and can ignite dangerous
situations due to the unresolved territorial disputes, such as Kashmir, as well
as the proliferation of nuclear weapons and also the wide range of religious,
ethnic, and left-wing rebellions that have links to regional and global terrorist
groups connected with organized crime. The South Asia region, unlike the
Southeast and Central Asia, also lacks regional organizations for security
cooperation. However, at a closer look, there is more security cooperation
among member countries of the SAARC than is visible in most political and
academic discussions. The collaboration is mostly bilateral and depends on
the overall relationship between India and its neighbors.
Security Cooperation
Since 1990s, the region has seen expansion of security cooperation and the
reason for this expansion is probably the change in India’s South Asia policy.
India has been inclined to make one-sided acknowledgements in bilateral
conflicts and in economic cooperation. However, now India seeks its security
interests through collaboration with its neighbors and not by interfering in
their domestic affairs anymore. For most of the South Asian countries, the
biggest security threats are ordained from the domestic challenges like, various
religious, ethnic and communist rebellions rather than from external forces.
Lack of institutionalization on the regional level for such security cooperation is
mainly due to the different types of conflicts in this region. Regional security
building is characterized by a system of different forms of collaboration.
External powers outside of the region, such as the United States and China
have exacerbated their relations in economic and security areas with South
Asian countries. However, these extra-regional powers have only limited
interest in becoming ramified in the various domestic conflicts. Hence military
cooperation by these South Asian countries with extra-regional powers is not
an interference for security collaboration. The European Union and Germany
also have shown interest in fostering the security cooperation process due to
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 47
Polish Journal of Political Science
this region’s complex security situation. In the context of bilateral cooperation,
these organizations and countries can improve the national security
architecture in South Asia, and at the same time may also contribute indirectly
to better regional collaboration in this field.
Bhutan’s Security Complex
From the perspective of India and its security system, Bhutan is the one of the
most vulnerable area because of its strategic frontier and endurance of the
entire Himalayan neighbors have become very important for India's security
after the Chinese occupation in Tibet. The British doctrine of preventing the
areas within its strategic interest is also practiced by India and hence India has
always been sensitive about preserving an exclusive control in the southern
Himalayan region. A vulnerable Bhutan means a vulnerable “buffer state” or
“extended frontier” for India with China. In order to help Bhutan to become
stronger, India has played an important role in pulling out Bhutan from its
isolation policy, assisted socio-economic development and promoted Bhutan’s
international stature through UN membership and other multilateral
organizations. India’s help and support diffusely fixed to Bhutan’s denial of
China’s assistance. Extensive assistance by India in security and defense
arrangements of Bhutan with regard to military training and preparing the
Royal Bhutan Army was induced by many circumstances such as location of
Bhutan, which is one of the most important in India’s security structure, the
increase of insurgency in the North-Eastern region of India, Chinese activity in
Tibet, India China Border disputes which dates back to 1914, border war
between India and China in 1962 and also the increasing Chinese threat to the
Indian boundaries. India’s military collaboration with Bhutan is uncontroversial
unlike the relationship with Nepal.
With the Friendship Treaty of August 1949, which gave India considerable
leverage in handling Bhutan’s foreign policy and international affairs, India also
intended to protect its own security interest as well in the Himalayan region.
Between 2012 and 2013, thirty-six percent of the funds from the Technical and
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 48
Polish Journal of Political Science
Economic Cooperation Program went to Bhutan.43 For many years, the
kingdom of Bhutan has been the biggest recipient of India’s development
assistance. The Indian Military Training Team was set up in 1963 for Bhutan in
order to help and support the training of the Bhutanese forces.44
Since the 1864-65 Duar war, no country has threatened Bhutan’s territorial
integrity. While Bhutan’s southern border was always quiet due to the
excellent Indo-Bhutan relationship, the greatest threat was from the northern
borders. The threats were territorial intrusions, land invasions and claims
against its sovereignty. Hence, the limited security forces of Bhutan have
guarded the northern borders and there was not even a single security check
points at the southern borders. In the recent years, ironically the major threats
to the Kingdom of Bhutan have entered through the southern borders rather
than the northern borders. These threats are the non-state actors from India,
from its north eastern region, the insurgents from North-East India, who have
been fighting for independence from India.
Since the 1990s, various militant groups which are operating in India’s
northeastern region had set up their camps in Bhutan’s southern part. These
insurgents have been using the Kingdom of Bhutan for refuge and for training
to perpetrate activities against crucial infrastructure and Indian security forces.
The presence of these militants on Bhutan’s soil have been a great concern for
Bhutan. The Bhutanese forces initiated a massive military operation in
December 2003 due to the pressure from the Indian government. This was the
first military operation, “Operation All Clear” ever conducted by the Royal
Bhutan Army between 15th December 2003 till 3rd January 2004 and they were
able to wipe out all 30 camps of the militant groups at the end of the
operation.45 Both countries have established the India-Bhutan Joint Group on
Border Management and Security.46 Bhutan has never militarized itself even if
it is situated between two military giants. However after the militant crisis and
43 Government of India, Ministry of External Affairs, Annual Report 2012–2013 (New Delhi, 2013), 210
44 Government of India, Ministry of Defense, Annual Report 2011–2012 (New Delhi, 2012), 190.
45 The Kuensel, Bhutan’s national newspaper reported on January 3, 2004
46 Government of India, Ministry of Defense, Annual Report 2005–2006 (New Delhi, 2006), 198.
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 49
Polish Journal of Political Science
“Operation All Clear”, Bhutan’s security forces employ 14,209 personnel.47
Bhutan has strengthened its security at the southern borders through regular
patrolling and surveillance of the areas which are high on risk. Bhutan have
also established military camps and deployed troops along the eastern and
western borders too.48
4. Bhutan’s Economic Factors
Foreign policy decisions are often influenced by the economic interest of the
country. Economic factors has become one of the most significant factors in
the international relations as almost all the country’s foreign policy is more
and more guided by financial considerations. Economic power or might
provide incomparably more political leverage than military might.
Globalization is inevitable and market takeover is now more important than
the annexation of territory. The growing economic interrelationship is
increasingly interpreting war as antiquated.
“When it is said that economics are more important today than they had ever
been, ‘economics’ can mean one, or more , of the following four things: (i)
economic means (ii) economic ends (iii) economic implications and (iv)
economic causes. It may mean therefore, that economic means (tariffs, quotas,
currency manipulation, aid, sanctions) are now more important; or that
economic ends (full employment, low inflation, growth, development) has
assumed more importance; or that political and other acts today have far
greater economic implications or consequences; or that a greater number of
significant political and other acts and events, including the achievement of
peace and the outbreak of war, have economic causes.”49
The economic performance of landlocked developing countries reflects the
direct and indirect impact of geographical situation on key-economic variables.
Landlocked developing countries are generally among the poorest of the
47 “Strengthening national security” at www.kuenselonline.com, July 25, 2004
48 “Need to strengthen Indo-Bhutan border security” at www.kuenselonline.com, July 25, 2004
49 “Economic Factor in International relations: A brief introduction”, Spyros, Peter, 2001. P.12
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 50
Polish Journal of Political Science
developing countries, with the weakest growth rates, and are typically heavily
dependent on a very limited number of commodities for their export earnings.
“Bhutan's economy, small and less developed, is based largely on hydropower,
agriculture, and forestry, which provide the main livelihood for more than half
of the population. Because rugged mountains dominate the terrain and make
the building of roads and other infrastructure difficult and expensive, industrial
production is primarily of the cottage industry type. The economy is closely
aligned with India's through strong trade and monetary links and is dependent
on India for financial assistance and migrant laborers for development projects,
especially for road construction. Multilateral development organizations
administer most educational, social, and environment programs, and take into
account the government's desire to protect the country's environment and
cultural traditions. For example, the government, in its cautious expansion of
the tourist sector, encourages visits by upscale, environmentally conscientious
tourists. Complicated controls and uncertain policies in areas such as industrial
licensing, trade, labor, and finance continue to hamper foreign investment.
Bhutan’s largest export - hydropower to India - could spur sustainable growth
in the coming years if Bhutan resolves chronic delays in construction. Bhutan
currently taps only 5% of its 30,000-megawatt hydropower potential and is
behind schedule in building 12 new hydropower dams with a combined
capacity of 10,000 megawatts by 2020 in accordance with a deal signed in 2008
with India. The high volume of imported materials to build hydropower plants
has expanded Bhutan's trade and current account deficits. However, Bhutan
and India in April 2014 agreed to begin four additional hydropower projects,
which would generate 2,120 megawatts in total. A declining GDP growth rate
in each of the past three years in the absence of new hydropower facilities has
constrained Bhutan’s ability to institute economic reforms. Bhutan inked a pact
in December 2014 to expand duty-free trade with Bangladesh, the only trade
partner with which Bhutan enjoys a surplus.”50
50 https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/bt.html
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 51
Polish Journal of Political Science
Economic development and the juncture of the development with regards to
economic development of any country has its consequences on the country’s
foreign policy. Countries which has more progressed industries are more
involved in international relations with other countries because these advanced
countries need markets for raw materials from where they can source and also
need markets where they can sell their products. These advanced countries
are also always on a lookout for advanced technical know-how and
knowledge. In order to fulfilled the above needs, these countries maintain close
association between the groups and people of one country with their
counterparts in the other country. Higher gross national product is expected
from these industrially advanced countries and to allocate greater funds for
economic aid program, military investment and comprehensive diplomatic
commitments. On the contrary, countries which are industrially backward have
not been able to involve themselves in the external affairs actively due to
many factors, such a lack of skilled professionals, think tanks etc.
Bhutan’s economy is predominantly rural, with more than 70 percent of its
population living in rural areas51. Bhutan’s economy is among the weakest
economies of the world and also in comparison in the whole of South Asia. In
the last 50 years of planned socio-economic development, Bhutan advanced
from the conventional lap to the prerequisite for economic ascend. Several
macroeconomic and human development indicators have enhanced
considerably since 1980. In the first six years of the present century, Bhutan
has experienced a sharp rise in average annual growth rate of real GDP to
7.9% from 5.9% in the 1990s.52
51 Planning Commission : Ninth Five year Plan 2002-07, p3
52 National Accounts Statistics 2009, National Statistical Bureau, Bhutan.
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 52
Polish Journal of Political Science
Bhutan in South Asia, 2014
Table 1
Country GDP (in Population Surface Population
US$) (in million) Area (1000 Density (people
sq.km) per square
kilometer of land
area
India 2 066
1 295
902 3287 435
Pakistan
185
246 876 796 240
Bangladesh
159
173 819 148 1222
Sri Lanka
20
74 941 65 329
Afghanistan
31
20 842 652 48
Nepal
28
19 636 147 196
Maldives
0.35
3 032 0.3 1191
Bhutan
0.76
1 821 47 20
Source: The World Bank data of 2014
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 53
Polish Journal of Political Science
Bhutan aspires to be a country where development is holistic, inclusive and
sustainable. The aspiration comes from the visionary statement “Gross National
Happiness is more important than Gross National product” first enunciated by
his Majesty the Fourth King of Bhutan in the early 1970s – long before
sustainable development became a global agenda.53 The economic reforms in
Bhutan is based on sustainable development, which takes into account the
social, financial, economic, cultural and environmental sectors while the
country’s flexibility is interpreted in terms of its capability to adapt and
respond effectively to changes.
During the last four decades of Bhutan’s planned economic development, the
country has increased its cooperation significantly at the bilateral and
multilateral levels. The strategy in development has gently started moving
towards assimilating the benefits of globalization and also increase in the
cooperation in international trade, through structural changes equipped at
securing faster growth and economic diversification. As the economic reform
process in Bhutan has not emerged from any economic crisis, there is a
difference from the “conditionally driven” reforms. The economic reform
process in Bhutan had been of self-adjustment based on the growing
requirements of its society and economy. The changes seen in Bhutan are
mainly driven by domestic needs and also due to repercussion from the
external developments in the neighboring countries. Therefore, the process of
economic reforms in Bhutan can be characterized as an experiment to make
up for disparity in policies with regard to its major partners in economic
development or from the requirement to associate in the international
communities to share the benefits of liberalization.
Bhutan has actuated its effective engagement under several forums and treaties
within and outside the sub region. Bhutan was given observer status in 2009 in
WTO. “In 2009, the then Thinley government had almost decided to join the
world trade body but withdrew at the last hour. The accession would open up
53 Government of Bhutan, Letter from the Prime Minister, Jigmi Y. Thinley, 31 May 2012
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 54
Polish Journal of Political Science
trade opportunities for the country but there are questions whether Bhutan can
sustain the open-door trade and promulgate enough legal tools to regulate such
trade”.54 It is perhaps the longest time Bhutan has ever taken to make a
decision. More than 15 years after it was granted an observer status to the
World Trade Organization, opinions remain divided over what the benefits
and dangers would be of joining the international body55.
Regional Economic Cooperation
For a small country like Bhutan, which is also a landlocked country, regional
economic cooperation is one of the most crucial forms of cooperation. Due to
the Indo-Bhutan treaty of 1949, Bhutan and India share special bilateral
relations in trade and development. The Growth Quadrangle Initiative within
SAARC, comprising Bangladesh, Bhutan, India and Nepal (BBIN-GQ) have
helped Bhutan in exports as well as in many other areas of economic
development. The BBIN-GQ was established to step up the pace of economic
development among the member countries through identification and
implementation of specific projects. The sectors identified for priority attention
are multi-model transportation and communication, energy, optimal sustainable
utilization of natural resource endowments, trade and investment facilitation
and promotion, and tourism and environment. However, there is very little
development in areas of cooperation like poverty eradication, social welfare
and improvement in the quality of life even though this initiative seeks
objectives beyond trade.
Bhutan has joined the Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and
Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC) in February 2004 at the sub-regional level
outside of SAARC. The objective of this alliance was to harness shared and
accelerated growth through mutual cooperation in different areas of common
interests by mitigating the onslaught of globalization and by utilizing regional
54 http://www.bhutannewsnetwork.com/2015/04/government-to-decide-soon-on-wto-accession/
55 http://www.bhutannewsnetwork.com/2014/02/bhutans-wto-dilemma/
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 55
Polish Journal of Political Science
resources and geographical advantages. Unlike many other regional groupings,
BIMSTEC is a sector-driven cooperative organization. 56
Table 2: Bhutan’s trade with neighboring countries and rest of the
world
Years 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
Expo Impo Expo Impo Expo Impo Expo Impo Expo Impo
rts rts rts rts rts rts rts rts rts rts
22,41 19,84 26,00 29,32 25,76 35,19 27,82 41,82 17,75 43,66
India 5.5 0.8 0.9 9.1 1.5 0.8 5.6 5.6 1.9 6.4
Bangla 1,226. 1,172. 1,465.
desh 758.0 0 906.1 0 7 0 2 0 0 0
Nepal 84.8 0 39.7 0 76.1 0 107.4 0 87.1 0
5,682. 2,377. 9746. 3,805. 1,349 10,84 1,321. 8,649,
Others 715.4 1 9 1 1 6.6 513.2 8,2 7 3
23,97 25,52 29,32 39,07 30,86 48,68 29,61 52,67 20,62 52,31
Total 3.9 2.9 4.4 5.2 9.5 7.4 8.4 3.8 5.7 5.7
Source: Royal Monetary Authority of Bhutan, Selected Economic
Indicators, March 2015
The Table 2 does not include China, even when the country is a neighbor,
mainly because of the fact that trade and economic contacts between Bhutan
and China are very limited and their common border remains closed. Bhutan
does not export to China. However the table below shows that there is
improvement, though slowly since Bhutan open its door to China’s import in
2000.
56 http://www.bimstec.org/index.php?page=overview
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 56
Polish Journal of Political Science
Table 3: Bhutan’s import data from China
200 200 200 200 200 200 200 200 200 200 201 201
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2012 2013
Import from China
205. 182. 281. 402. 844. 487. 611. 878. 1,330. 1,089.
71.8 15.8 74.1 29.1 3 2 7 7 7 3 0 3 2 3
Import shares in percentage from China
0.8 0.2 0.8 0.3 1.1 1.1 1.5 1.9 3.6 1.9 1.6 1.8 2.5 2.1
Source: Royal Monetary Authority of Bhutan, Selected Economic
Indicators
Bhutan’s decision to broaden and deepen relations with India and the policy of
engagement with China post-2000 indicate that when threats to national
security and political culture are low, or minimal, economic opportunities
guide foreign policy choices in Bhutan.57
5. Gross National Happiness
Gross National Happiness or GNH is a policy instituted in Bhutan in the 1970s
which aimed at a holistic and sustainable approach to development, which
balances material and non-material values upon the conviction that humans
want to search for happiness and to determine the priorities in order to
maximize happiness for both individual and society.58 The kingdom of Bhutan
seems to be in a predicament to modernize and develop, while at the same
time to upholding its unique traditional and cultural identity. Bhutan’s ruling
57 ‘Bhutan’s foreign policy determinants: An assessment’, Medha Bisht, 2012. P.65
58 http://www.gnhcentrebhutan.org/what-is-gnh/
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 57
Polish Journal of Political Science
elite has adopted the Gross National Happiness as the alternate path to achieve
both the objectives.
The development strategy of Bhutan seeks to strike an appropriate balance
among social, economic, political, cultural and environment goals. While
mapping the future development course, Bhutan 2020: A Vision for Peace,
Prosperity and Happiness clearly brings out these goals in the “Normative
Architecture for Change and Development”. The development strategy places
human development at the center-stage. A holistic approach to development
has been designed to take care of material as well as spiritual needs of
individuals. Health and education are considered priority areas for basic
capacity development towards the generation of human capital. This is to be
achieved within the framework of traditional values and ethics so that the
“society in transformation” continues to draw inspiration from the nation’s
cultural heritage. It is crucial that sustainability be observed because an
untenable proposition in any field is likely to have a negative impact on the
sovereignty and security of the nation.59 The national development vision
accords the Gross National Happiness as the central development concept, one
that encompasses goals, principles, objectives and direction of development.60
59 Planning Commission, Royal Government of Bhutan, Part II
60 https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/798bhutanreport.pdf
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 58
Polish Journal of Political Science
Figure 2.:
Source: Royal Government of Bhutan, Planning Commission, Part II, Bhutan
2020 : A Vision for Peace, Prosperity and Happiness. 61
Bhutan started the journey of modernization and development only after 1950
and follows a policy to have closer ties with India through the treaty of 1949.
Nonetheless, consciously Bhutan has been making effort to allow
modernization and developments to happen in a way that these developments
does not damage its basic cultural ethos. After many decades of limiting its
foreign aid resources to a few friendly countries like India, Bhutan has
expanded its foreign aid avenues in the last few years, but it has been
conscious of her goals and requirements. Bhutan Prime Minister made it clears
thus: “We are looking for economic assistance from countries other than
61 http://unpan1.un.org/intradoc/groups/public/documents/apcity/unpan005250.pdf, p.15
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 59
Polish Journal of Political Science
traditional donor nations, but we are determined to ensure that such aid has no
political strings attached. We shall not seek aid from either the US or the USSR
as we do not wish to get involved in the super power racket”.62
Bhutan is also concerned about the preservation of its traditional religion and
cultural identity, peace and stability, which indeed is a vital aspect of the
concept of GNH. The Bhutanese ruling elite believes that its sovereignty and
identity depends on the preservation of its cultural values as represented by
Drukpa society and Buddhist religion. It was opined that: “This imperative,
which has been linked tour identity, sovereignty and even survival as a nation
state, must find clear expression in the priorities and directions we set for the
future. More than 350 years ago, Shabdrung Ngawang Namgyal realized that
Bhutan’s independence was dependent upon the formation of a distinct identity
that would enable the nation to preserve its culture and religion in world that
was hostile to its existence. Today, it is the culture and tradition bequeathed to
us by our ancestors that can protect us from some of the negative and
indiscriminate forces of modernization and enable us to retain our identity and
dignity in a world in which ‘culture’ is increasingly defined as a global
commodity”.63
The concept of the GNH and the foreign policy orientation has been
complimentary to each other. In fact, the alternative model of development that
Bhutan has pursued needs a balanced foreign policy as well as to limit its
foreign policy options according to its requirements. Bhutan became a member
of the United Nations in 1971. Bhutan became a member of the United Nations
in 1971. Bhutan does not have diplomatic relations with any of the permanent
members of the UN Security Council, including the United States.64 Currently,
Bhutan maintains 5 embassies abroad in Bangladesh, Belgium, India, Kuwait
and Thailand as well as 20 consulates and other representations. The
Bhutanese capital Thimphu hosts 3 embassies, and in addition there are 6
62 Times Of India, September 29, 1985
63 Bhutan 2020:A Vision for Peace, Prosperity and Happiness, Part II, p.34
64 US Department of State, Diplomacy in Action. http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/35839.htm
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 60
Polish Journal of Political Science
consulates and 5 other representations in Bhutan.65 Despite not having
residential diplomatic relations, Japan, Norway, Denmark, Austria, Switzerland
and Netherlands are the countries which are seriously engaged in Bhutan’s
development in recent years. In fact, these are the countries which have taken
interest in Bhutan’s alternative path of development. It is clear that: (i) Bhutan’s
foreign policy operates in a limited framework; (ii) Bhutan’s relations are
confined to few countries only; (iii) Bhutan has not accepted economic
assistance from the traditional donor countries whose aid is generally believed
to have political strings attached to it; and (iv) Bhutan has instead accepted aid
from those countries which have appreciated its model of development, and its
priorities and needs. A balanced foreign policy approach is required to attain
the objectives of GNH.66
Bhutan’s Foreign Policy
The bottom line of the foreign policy of any nation, small or big, is the
achievement of its external goals. Bhutan is not different from other countries,
the ultimate aspiration of Bhutan is also the fulfilment of its national interests.
The objectives of Bhutanese foreign policy as described in the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, Royal Government of Bhutan are as follow:
1. Political:
 to enhance and maintain national security,
 promote world peace and security by engaging in meaningful dialogue
with the international community,
 promote and contribute towards international understanding and
cooperation as well as international peace and security on the basis of
peaceful co-existence,
2. Economic and Trade:
65 http://www.embassypages.com/bhutan
66 Gross National Happiness and Foreign Policy of Bhutan : Interlinkages and Imperatives, B.C. Upreti.
P.11
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 61
Polish Journal of Political Science
 develop and expand mutually beneficial bilateral, regional and
multilateral economic and trade co-operation,
 contribute towards the development of a dynamic and a sustainable
economy through mobilization of external resources.
In May 1983, King Jigme Singye Wangchuck outlined the basic framework of
the foreign policy of Bhutan: “Our aim continues to be threefold: Firstly, we are
committed politically to be a strong and loyal sense of nationhood to ensuring
the peace and security of our citizens and the sovereign territorial integrity of
our land. Secondly, to achieve economic self-reliance and thirdly to preserve
the ancient religious and cultural heritage that has far so many centuries
strengthened and enriched our lives”
New political and economic developments have brought changes in the foreign
policy goals of Bhutan since the late sixties. Following factors have influenced
the growth of Bhutanese foreign policy and its formulations. 67
 Firstly, realization of its geo-strategic importance between two Asian
giant nations – China and India, has provided profound and continual
impact on its foreign policy.
 Secondly, Bhutan’s treaty relations with India, heavy dependence on
India economic aid and its land-locked status hindered the growth of
independent diplomacy.
 Thirdly, absence of political parties and non-subscription to any of the
large ideologies that determined the course of work politics until the
eighties had direct bearing to the growth of country’s relatively stable
but limited external relations. It never had a ‘neutral’, or ‘equi-
proximity’, or ‘equi-distance’ foreign policy towards its giant neighbor.
There was set foreign policy agenda in any given period of time.
67 Bhutan, Country Study Guide, Volume 1, Strategic information and development, P. 134, 135
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 62
Polish Journal of Political Science
 Fourthly, lack of education and professional manpower, financial
resources and traditional mindset of Bhutanese society also influenced
the conduct of foreign policy at very minimal. As a traditional society,
country’s need were also very minimal in the past. The Ministry of
Foreign Affairs was created only in 1972, before that it was a part of
Ministry of Development. Until mid-seventies, Bhutanese foreign policy
was largely Indo-centric and inward looking. The growth of external
relations can be grouped into four major heads: relationship with India,
multilateral, regional and international bilateral relationships.
The Foreign Policy of Bhutan has operated within three basic parameters since
the 1960s and they are as follows:
 internal consolidation
 gradual extension of diplomatic and economic relations
 active involvement with non-controversial regional issues.68
Bhutan’s Foreign Policy towards India
Amity towards India is the core of Bhutan’s foreign policy, characterized by
the evolution from an exclusive and dependent relationship to a more
balanced and strategic partnership.69 The Bhutan government decided to
strengthen Indo-Bhutan relations, but to do this cautiously. Bhutan started to
developed close relations with India with its two foreign policy objectives,
namely: “Modernization of the economic, governmental and educational
system” and “Building a modern defense capability”.70
Reiterating that India is the cornerstone of Bhutan's foreign policy, Bhutanese
Prime Minister Tshering Tobgay said that the Bhutanese Government is
committed to this policy, and added that Prime Minister Narendra Modi's visit
to his country is significant for the bilateral relations between the two
68 Bhutan Steps Out, S.D. Muni, The World Today, (London), Vol. 40, no.12, (December, 1981), p.514-
520
69 A political and Economic Dictionary of South Asia, Mitra, Wolf, Schottli first edition, p.69
70 K.J. Holsti, Why Nations Realign : Foreign Policy Restructuring in the Postwar World, (London :
1982), p.25.
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 63
Polish Journal of Political Science
countries.71 In 1958, when the magazine “China Pictorial” printed a map
showing a part of Bhutan within China’s border, the National Assembly of
Bhutan objected, but asked India to take up the matter with China on behalf of
the Bhutan Government. This revealed the extent to which Bhutan traditionally
had depended on India for the conduct of its external affairs, the basis for
which was Clause 2 of the Indo-Bhutanese Treaty of 1949: “The Government of
India undertakes no interference in the internal administration of Bhutan. On
its part the Government of Bhutan agrees to be guided by the advice of the
Government of India in regard to its external relations”72. The Indo-Bhutanese
Treaty of 1949, which gave India control over Bhutan’s foreign relations, was
renegotiated in 2007 to allow Bhutan greater sovereignty in foreign policy.
However, India will likely continue to have substantial influence over
Bhutanese politics.73
Bhutan’s pursuit for an independent identity had lead Bhutan to act on a few
occasions in opposition to India’s decision on the international forum. In 1971-
72, Bhutan established relations with Bangladesh without seeking India’s
approval. In 1979, Bhutan differed with India on the issue of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM) summit in Havana regarding the Republic of Kampuchea’s
admission to the UN. Bhutan also differed with India on the issue of position of
landlocked countries in the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development (UNCTAD) in Manila. It abstained from voting at the UN on the
Afghanistan issue as it was against the presence of Soviet troops in
Afghanistan.74 It is articulated that, “Bhutan’s search for identity is usually
interpreted as Bhutan’s urge to come out of the shadow of its huge southern
71 http://www.dnaindia.com/india/report-india-is-cornerstone-to-bhutan-s-foreign-policy-reiterates-
bhutan-pm-tshering-tobgay-1995908
72 Syed Aziz-al Ahsan, Bhumitra Chakma. (1993) Bhutan’s Foreign Policy. Cautious Self-Assertion. Asian
Survey, Vol 33. No.11.P. 1043
73 AMB, Country Risk Report, http://www3.ambest.com/ratings/cr/reports/Bhutan.pdf
74 Bhutan’s Foreign Policy Determinants : An assessment, Medha Bisht, 5th Jan 2012, p. 61
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 64
Polish Journal of Political Science
neighbor India, which had remained a dominant consideration for the regime
in Thimpu since the British period.”75
Even though Bhutan shares a very close and friendly relationship with India, it
has always been mindful of the inequality between the two countries. During a
very limited period of late seventies and early eighties there has been a major
structural shift in its foreign policy vis-à-vis India. Bhutan perceived bilateral
relations with India politically risky and uncertain, especially after the
annexation of Sikkim in 1975. Hence, Bhutan opted for multilateralism in its
subsequent stages of economic development in the late seventies and early
eighties.76 In contemplation of reducing the political risk, Bhutan has been
expanding and transforming its international relations by applying for
membership and successively becoming members in a number of international
organizations. Bhutan is now a member of 154 international organizations.77
Many small countries in South Asia play the China card while trying to balance
the Indian hegemony. But Bhutan has not seen so far the need to use the China
card against India because a pro-China policy for Bhutan is not a practical
choice, since China is not in a position to sustain Bhutan economically in the
long run. Supply lines into Bhutan favor India and not China.78 Bhutan may not
completely trust India, but Bhutan also does not consider India as a national
threat. Bhutan has stood by India on issues such as its refusal to rarity the
Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Comprehensive Test Ban Treaties and India’s
clear test in May 1998 in Pokhran even though Bhutan has neither the
capability, nor the determination to develop nuclear weapons,.79
Bhutan’s actions in the last few decades indicate that while maintaining good
relationship with its huge neighbor India, it has also been successful in creating
75 'Bhutan's South Asian Initiatives', Strategic Analysis, (New Delhi), vol.VII, no.l2, S.D. Muni, p.l005.
76 Bhutan, Country Study Guide, Volume 1, Strategic information and development, P.135
77 http://www.mfa.gov.bt/foreign-policy/multilateral-relations
78 Elections in the Himalayan Kingdom : New Dawn of India-Bhutan Relations, M Shamsur Rabb
Khan, 8th April 2008, http://www.ipcs.org/article/bhutan/elections-in-the-himalayan-kingdom-new-dawn-
of-india-bhutan-2540.html
79 A political and Economic Dictionary of South Asia, Mitra, Wolf, Schottli first edition, p.69
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 65
Polish Journal of Political Science
a unique identity and project its independent status in the international
community.
Bhutan’s Foreign Policy towards China
Bhutan felt vulnerable when the Chinese aggression of Tibet in 1959, the
incident periled Bhutan’s trust and intentions of China and Bhutan was shaken
by the Chinese offensive during that time. This was the incident and the time
when the King of Bhutan, Jigme Dorji Wangchuk, decided that Bhutan should
come out of its isolation in order to save its sovereignty. As Bhutan is
landlocked between China and India and does not share any border with any
other country, the option left for Bhutan, when it felt threatened from China,
was to move closer to its southern neighbor India. After 1959 Bhutan
predominantly perceived national security as being synonymous with economic
development. This objective was clearly articulated in 1959 when the National
Assembly concluded that maintaining sovereignty of the kingdom through
economic self-reliance and discovering ways and means of developing the
nation should be Bhutan’s primary objective.80
Cautiously Bhutan has not so far shared any diplomatic relations with any of
the permanent members of the UN Security Council, including China as Bhutan
feels that it does not want to be in the power struggle of the world. Jigmi
Yoser Thinley, Bhutan’s then-Prime Minister expressed that “there was a time
when diplomatic relations signified one’s position vis-à-vis conflicting powers,
choosing sides. It’s no longer the case”81. The bilateral relations between
Bhutan and China cannot be considered poor ever since both the countries
started Sino-Bhutan Border talks in 1984, despite not having formal diplomatic
ties. However the trade relation is quite minimal even though Bhutan knows
that the country will benefit if the trade relations with China improve.
80 Resolutions adopted during the 13th session of the national Assembly of Bhutan on 30th of the 8th
month of Earth Hog Year corresponding to 31.10.59.
http://www.nab.gov.bt/assets/uploads/docs/resolution/2014/13th_Session.pdf
81 http://www.bhutannewsservice.com/main-news/we-dont-need-formal-relations-with-washington-pm-
thinley/
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 66
Polish Journal of Political Science
Bhutan supported China’s admission to the United Nations in 1971, recognizes
PRC’s One-China policy, and voted adversely when Taiwan attempted to
participate in international forums. The relations between Bhutan and China is
sometimes endangered by the Chinese troops’ incursions into Bhutan’s
territory. To resolve the demarcation of the boundary line with China and also
the question of intrusion of Tibetans in Bhutanese territory, and while doing so
maintaining good relations and an atmosphere of friendship and co-operation
with China, are the main objectives of Bhutan’s foreign policy.82 However, the
opening of direct talks between Bhutan and China for the settlement of their
long-standing boundary dispute can be considered as the most important
development in Bhutan's steadily evolving foreign policy. Bhutanese eagerness
to have direct talks with China could be seen from the speech the Foreign
Minister of Bhutan, Dawa Tshering at the Tshogudu in June 1981. He said that
Bhutan would like to start direct and bilateral negotiations with China to
delineate and demarcate the Bhutan-China boundary, and that the status-quo
in the present Bhutan traditional border should be maintained until such time
as the border negotiations were concluded.83 “The Royal Government of
Bhutan no doubt wants China as a friendly (or at least non-threatening)
neighbor, but one with whom relations are correct rather than intimate.”84This
is how the foreign policy of a small state like Bhutan works for its survival
when it is sandwiched between two powerful countries. Such a policy cannot
but be ambivalent and non-antagonistic. A small state has little choice other
than to maintain a low profile in dealing with its larger and more powerful
82 Himalayan Frontiers of India : Historical, geo-political and Strategic perspectives, K, Warikoo,2009,
p.154
83 S.D. Muni, 'Sino-Bhutanese Boundary and Implications for India', Mainstream vol.XXIV, no.4l, 14
June, 1986, pp. 17-20.
84 Leo E. Rose, The politics of Bhutan, Ithaca and London (1974), p.96
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 67
Polish Journal of Political Science
neighbors. This is the strategic stand taken by Bhutan vis-à-vis China.85
Bhutan’s China policy operates in accordance with India-China relations. 86
Conclusion
Bhutan has been a very vulnerable country due to many factors, especially
due to its geopolitical location. The Bhutanese leaders have enforced the
foreign policy initiatives and the developmental plans judiciously. The leaders
under the guidance of the king, has managed to bring up this tiny country in
the global scenario without doing harm in its ecosystem. Today, the country
has successfully followed the gross national happiness way of measuring
country’s development. Bhutan has successfully transitioned from monarchy to
democracy and in maintaining its sovereignty mainly due to the
foresightedness of its leaders. The country has slowly opened to the outside
world but Bhutan is still yet to establish diplomatic ties with its second
neighbor, China. Bhutan will be all the more cautious when it comes to
changing its alliance with India due to the recent event in Nepal.
85 Foreign policy of Bhutan : with special reference to its relations with neighbours since 1952,
Shrikrishna, Kharat Rajesh, p. 161
86 A political and Economic Dictionary of South Asia, Jivanta Schottli, Subrata K. Mitra, Siegried Wolf,
p. 69
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 68
Polish Journal of Political Science
References
Central Intelligence Agency, „the world factbook”.
https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-
factbook/geos/bt.html
“Moral fervor, Systematic Analysis, and Scientific Consciousness in Foreign
Policy Research” in Austin Ranney, ed., Political Science and Public
Policy (Chicago , III, : Markham, 1968
Modelski, George. (1962) A theory of Foreign Policy, George. Princeton
University
Cecil V. Crabb Jr. (1988) American Foreign Policy in the Nuclear Age. New
York. Harper & Row
Steve Smith, Amelia Hadfield, Tim Dunne. (2008) Foreign Policy – Theories,
Actors, Cases. United Kingdom. Oxford University Press
http://unohrlls.org/about-lldcs/
http://www.nationsonline.org/oneworld/countries_by_area.htm
http://www.worldometers.info/world-population/population-by-country/
Garver, W. John. (2001) Protracted Contest. University of Washington Press
http://www.southasiaanalysis.org/node/1747
Bisht, Medha (2010) “Sino-Bhutan Boundary Negotiations: Complexities of the
‘Package Deal’”. http://www.idsa.in/idsacomments/Sino-
BhutanBoundaryNegotiations_mbisht_190110
Warikoo, K. (2009). “Himalayan Frontiers of India”. Routledge
http://www.bhutandnc.com/bhutantodayjan06.htm
http://www.kuenselonline.com/category/news/
Bhutan, Foreign Policy and Government Guide. Volume 1. Startegic Information
and Development. International Business Publications, USA
Bhutan Observer, http://bhutanobserver.bt/1-bo-section-News.aspx
http://www.nab.gov.bt/en/about/parliament-history
http://www.nab.gov.bt/en/about/overview-national-assembly
http://www.nab.gov.bt/en/about/mission-vision
http://oag.gov.bt/wp-content/uploads/2011/02/Rules-Regulation-of-the-Royal-
Advisory-Council-1993-English.pdf
Pacific Affairs, Volume 47.
http://pacificaffairs.sites.olt.ubc.ca/files/2011/07/Volume47.pdf
http://rulers.org/fm1.html
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 69
Polish Journal of Political Science
Hurd, Ian. (2007) After Anarchy. Legitimacy & Power in the United Security
Council Princeton University Press
Haynes, Jeffrey. (2008) Routledge handbook of religion and politics, London.
New York. Routledge
2007 Report on International Religious Freedom.
http://www.state.gov/j/drl/rls/irf/2007/90227.htm
Buzan, Barry. (1991) People, States & Fear. An Agenda for international
Security studies in the post – cold war era. Harvester Wheatsheaf
Buzan and Waever. (2003). Regions and Powers : the structure of
international security. Cambridge University Press
Government of India, Ministry of External Affairs, Annual Report
Spyros, Peter. (2001). “Economic Factor in International relations: A brief
introduction”. I. B. Tauris & Co Ltd.
https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/bt.html
Planning Commission : Ninth Five year Plan 2002-07
National Accounts Statistics 2009, National Statistical Bureau, Bhutan.
Government of Bhutan, Letter from the Prime Minister, Jigmi Y. Thinley, 31
May 2012
http://www.bhutannewsnetwork.com
http://www.bimstec.org/index.php?page=overview
Bisht, Medha. (2012) Bhutan’s foreign policy determinants: An assessment
http://www.gnhcentrebhutan.org/what-is-gnh/
Planning Commission, Royal Government of Bhutan, Part II
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/798bhutanreport.pdf
Bhutan 2020:A Vision for Peace, Prosperity and Happiness, Part II
US Department of State, Diplomacy in Action.
http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/35839.htm
http://www.embassypages.com/bhutan
Upreti, B.C. Gross National Happyness and Foreign Policy of Bhutan :
Interlinkages and Imperatives.
http://www.gpiatlantic.org/conference/papers.htm
Bhutan Steps Out, S.D. Muni, The World Today, (London), Vol. 40, no.12,
(December, 1981)
Subrata, Siegfried, Jivanta. (2006) A political and Economic Dictionary of
South Asia. London. New York. Routledge
Holsti, K.J. (1982). Why Nations Realign : Foreign Policy Restructuring in the
Postwar World. London. Routledge
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 70
Polish Journal of Political Science
http://www.dnaindia.com
Ahsan, Chakma. (1993) Bhutan’s Foreign Policy. Cautious Self-Assertion.
Asian Survey, Vol 33. No.11
AMB, Country Risk Report,
http://www3.ambest.com/ratings/cr/reports/Bhutan.pdf
Muni, S.D. (1984) “Bhutan’s South Asia Initiatives”, Strategic Analysis, Vol.11.
No. 12
http://www.mfa.gov.bt/foreign-policy/multilateral-relations
M Shamsur Rabb Khan. (2008) Elections in the Himalayan Kingdom : New
Dawn of India-Bhutan Relations,
http://www.ipcs.org/article/bhutan/elections-in-the-himalayan-kingdom-
new-dawn-of-india-bhutan-2540.html
http://www.nab.gov.bt/assets/uploads/docs/resolution/2014/13th_Session.pdf
Muni, S.D. (1986). , 'Sino-Bhutanese Boundary and Implications for India',
Mainstream vol.XXIV, no.4l
Kharat, Rajesh. S. (2005). Foreign policy of Bhutan. Manak Publications
Ramakant. Misra. (1998) Bhutan : Society and Polity. New Delhi. Indus
Publishing Company
Chopra, V.D (2006). India’s Foreign Policy in the 21st Century. New Delhi.
Kalpaz Publications.
Benjamin, Joshep. (2010). Democratic Process, Foreign Policy and Human
Rights in South Asia. New Delhi. Gyan Publishing House
Atish Sinha, Madhup Mohta. (2007). Indian Foreign Policy : Challenges and
Opportunities. New Delhi. Academic Foundation.
Sri Ram Sharma. (2002) Indian Foreign Policy. Foreign Policy Research
Centre.
Reetika Sharma. Ramvir Goria. Vivek Mishra. (2011). India and the Dynamics
of World Politics. India. Pearson.
Ramesh Trivedi. (2008). India’s relations with Her Neighbours. Delhi. Isha
Books
Donovan C. Chau. Thomas M. Kane. (2014). China and International
Security: History, Stratedy and 21st Century Policy. Praeger
M. Taylor Fravel. (2008). Strong Border , Secure Nation: Cooperation and
Conflict in China’s Territorial Disputes. Princeton University Press.
Keshav Mishra. (2004). Rapproachment Across The Himalayas : Emerging
India – China Relationsin Post Cold War Period – (1947 – 2003). New
Delhi. Kalpaz Publications
Peu Ghosh. (2013). International Relations. New Delhi . PHI Learning Pvt.
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 71
Polish Journal of Political Science
Ltd.
S.D. Muni. Tan Tai Yong. (2012). A Resurgent China : South Asia
Perspective. India . Routledge
R. S. Chavan.(1979) Chinese Foreign Policy. Sterling
Tan Chung. (1998). Across The Himalayan Gap : An Indian Quest for
Understanding China. New Delhi. Gyan Publishing House
Dinesh Lal. (2008). Indo – Tibet – China Conflict. Kalpaz Publications
Bhuwan Chandra Upreti. (2004) Bhutan, dilemma of change in a Himalayan
kingdom. Kalinga Publications.
R. C. Dogra (1990) Bhutan. Clio Press
Parmanand. (1992). The Politics of Bhutan : Retrospect and Prospect. Pragati
Publications
Jonathan Holslag. (2010). China and India : Prospect for Peace. Columbia
University Press.
Swaran Singh. (2003) China – South Asia, issues, equations, policies.
Lancer’s Books
Vol. 2, Issue 2, 2016 72

========== Foreign-Policy-Document.pdf ==========

Foreign Policy of the Kingdom of Bhutan
FOREIGN POLICY
“The fundamental goal of Bhutan’s foreign policy is to safeguard the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, security, unity, and enhance the wellbeing and economic prosperity
of Bhutan. The realization of this goal hinges on the maintenance of friendly and
cooperative relations and collaboration with all countries to promote a just, peaceful and
secure international environment.”
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
The Guiding Principles for Bhutan’s foreign policy which have been drawn from the
Constitution of the Kingdom of Bhutan are:
1. Safeguard the sovereignty, territorial integrity, security and unity of Bhutan;
2. Preserve the political, cultural, and spiritual heritage of the country;
3. Develop friendly and mutually beneficial relations with all countries;
4. Achieve socio-economic self-reliance;
5. Enhance sustainable socio-economic development of the country;
6. Contribute towards building a peaceful, secure and prosperous world;
7. Promote respect for the rule of law, peaceful co-existence and peaceful settlement
of disputes.
VISION
“Advancing Gross National Happiness for a peaceful, prosperous and sovereign
Bhutan”
MISSION
“A professional Foreign Service that is responsive to Bhutan’s interests and aspirations”
1
OBJECTIVES
1. To safeguard the sovereignty, territorial integrity, security and unity of Bhutan and
​ ​
promote its unique identity, cultural heritage and the pursuit of Gross National
Happiness.
2. To promote Bhutan’s peaceful co-existence and develop friendly relations with all
countries and engage in regional and multilateral cooperative efforts.
3. To be a responsible and constructive member of the international community and
contribute towards the global effort in safeguarding international peace, security,
understanding and cooperation.
4. To contribute towards sustainable socio-economic development of the country and
promotion of trade relations/FDI and economic partnerships.
5. To adopt a principled approach on all issues by upholding international law and
promoting peaceful settlement of disputes.
6. To provide consular services and protect the rights and interests of Bhutanese
abroad.
I. STRATEGIC OVERVIEW:
1. Bhutan is a small landlocked developing country. It is located between two large and
most populous countries in the world (India and China).
2. Bhutan’s history, geo-political location and the continuously evolving regional and
global strategic environment determines its foreign policy. Further, the kingdom’s
limited resources to pursue its national goals and interests weigh heavily on the
design of its foreign policy.
3. Diplomacy has always been a vital tool in Bhutan’s engagement with its neighbours
and the world at large in safeguarding its sovereignty, security and pursuing
development.
II. HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
1. After the unification of Bhutan as a nation state by Zhabdrung Ngawang Namgyel in
the 17th Century, Bhutan’s focus had been on repulsing invasions from Tibet and
​
Mongol armies from the north. During this period, Bhutan established diplomatic and
monastic ties with Nepal, Ladakh and Sikkim.
2
2. The expansion of British presence into Cooch Bihar and Assam for tea plantations in
the 18th century came in direct conflict with Bhutan’s influence in these areas.
​
Several battles between the British and Bhutanese were fought along these
corridors known as the Duar Wars, which led to the signing of the Treaty of Sinchula
in 1865. The treaty provided for perpetual peace between the British Government
and the Government of Bhutan.
3. After the Duar Wars, Bhutan entered into a policy of self-imposed isolation. While
maintaining friendly relations with the British, the Bhutanese leaders ensured that
the British did not have a presence inside Bhutan. The communication between
Bhutan and the British was carried out through the Office of Bhutan’s representative
in Kalimpong (in present day West Bengal).
4. In 1904, Trongsa Penlop Ugyen Wangchuck successfully mediated peace between
the British and the Tibetans during the Younghusband expedition to Tibet which
enhanced his stature both at home and with the British.
5. In 1910, under the directions of His Majesty Gongsar Ugyen Wangchuck, the First
King, Bhutan entered into a treaty with the British (Treaty of Punakha), which further
reinforced Bhutan’s sovereignty and formed the basis of Bhutan’s foreign policy until
the departure of the British from India.
6. With the departure of the British from India in 1947, His Majesty Jigme Wangchuck,
the Second King formalized Bhutan’s relations with newly independent India through
the signing of the India-Bhutan Friendship Treaty of 1949. In light of the fast evolving
political environment in the region in 1950, Bhutan’s foreign policy underwent a
paradigm shift from one of self-imposed isolation to gradual but steady engagement
with the outside world, leading to the path of socio-economic development while
preserving its rich cultural heritage and pristine environment.
7. The state visit of His Majesty Jigme Dorji Wangchuck, the Third King of Bhutan, as
the Chief Guest for India’s Republic Day celebrations in 1954 at the invitation of
Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru and the historic visit of Prime Minister Nehru to
Bhutan in 1958 laid the foundations for the excellent relations that the two countries
enjoy today.
8. His Majesty Jigme Dorji Wangchuck, the Third King decided to end the policy of
self-imposed isolation and pursue the path of planned socio-economic development.
Bhutan commenced its first Five Year Plan (planned socio-economic development)
in 1961 with generous assistance from India. In 1962, Bhutan became a member of
the Colombo Plan, Universal Postal Union (UPU) in 1969, United Nations Capital
Development Fund (UNCDF) in 1970. Bhutan was unanimously voted in as a
3
member of the United Nations Organization (UN) in 1971. Following Bhutan’s
admission to the UN, Bhutan also became a member of its related organizations
such as the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), Group of 77 and United Nations
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP). During this
period, Bhutan had diplomatic relations with only India. The Office of the Special
Representative of India was opened in Thimphu in 1968 and a Resident Mission of
Bhutan with a Special Representative was established in Delhi in 1971. The two
resident missions were designated as Embassies in 1978. The second country that
Bhutan established diplomatic relations was with Bangladesh in 1973.
9. In order to avoid being involved in international power politics prevalent during the
period, Bhutan joined the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) in 1973. The interactions
during the NAM Summits resulted in Bhutan establishing diplomatic relations with
Kuwait in 1983 and Nepal in 1984. The establishment of the South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) in 1985 was also a result of
interaction between friendly countries of South Asia during subsequent NAM
Summits.
10.His Majesty Jigme Singye Wangchuck, the Fourth Druk Gyalpo continued the
gradual expansion of Bhutan’s relations and engagement with other countries and
international organizations. Bhutan began receiving assistance from the UNDP and
other related organizations of the UN. Subsequently, the UNDP Resident Office was
also established in Thimphu in 1979. Bhutan also joined the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) in 1982 and began receiving assistance.
Diplomatic relations with the Netherlands, the European Union, Denmark, Sweden,
Switzerland and Norway were established in 1985 and with Japan in 1986.
11.By 2003, Bhutan had expanded its diplomatic relations with 22 countries from
different parts of the world which included Sri Lanka and Pakistan from the SAARC
region, Austria, Finland, South Korea, Thailand, Bahrain, Singapore and Canada. In
2009, Bhutan established diplomatic relations with Belgium and set up an Embassy
in Brussels which is also the headquarters of the European Union. Bhutan became
an observer to the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 1999.
12.Bhutan departed from its policy of following a gradual approach to establishing
diplomatic relations with development assistance as the main criteria in 2009 when
Bhutan made a bid for a non-permanent seat in the UN Security Council in 2012 and
established diplomatic relations with 28 countries.
4
13.Even as Bhutan was expanding its relations and engagement with the outside world,
the ties of friendship, understanding and cooperation with India grew in strength. The
Indo-Bhutan Friendship Treaty of 2007 provides the framework for further
strengthening the exemplary friendship, understanding and cooperation between
India and Bhutan in an increasingly globalized world.
14.His Majesty The King has further strengthened India-Bhutan relations by building on
the trust and friendship consolidated by His Majesty the Fourth Druk Gyalpo. His
Majesty The King was invited as the Chief Guest for the Republic Day of India in
2013 and to demonstrate the friendship and close ties between India and Bhutan,
Prime Minister Narendra Modi chose Bhutan as his first official visit abroad after
coming to power in response to the invitation from His Majesty The King.
15.His Majesty The King has further enhanced Bhutan’s relations with other friendly
countries like Japan, Thailand, Bangladesh, Singapore and Kuwait. His Majesty’s
State Visit to Japan in 2011 to convey sympathy and solidarity of the Bhutanese
people towards those who suffered as a result of the Great East Japan Earthquake
was greatly appreciated by the Japanese people.
16.Under His Majesty The King’s reign, Bhutan’s status as an active and responsible
member of the international community has gained further prominence. His
Majesty’s multilateral vision for the country is centered on the principles of
international solidarity and cooperation in addressing global issues. In keeping with
this Royal vision and reflecting the country’s long-standing support and commitment
to the UN, and its obligation as a member of the international community to promote
international peace and security, Bhutan began participating in UN Peacekeeping
Operations in 2014. This was a major foreign policy initiative reaffirming Bhutan’s
interests and values in support of a more stable, resilient and prosperous world.
17.In the age of globalization and knowledge-based economies and societies, the level
of scientific and technological capacities of a nation will determine its development
and progress. Scientific and technological issues are also increasingly dominating
global affairs. His Majesty The King has emphasized the importance for Bhutan to
actively leverage its diplomacy and tap into the growing science base of more
advanced countries to help develop our human resource capacity and stimulate
innovation. Under Royal initiative Bhutan has laid the foundation of a satellite
program in order to take advantage of emerging space technology and its
application for the benefit of the country.
5
III. BILATERAL ENGAGEMENTS
1. Bhutan’s foreign policy since emerging from the policy of self-imposed isolation was
driven by the imperative to promote its sovereign and independent status and to
facilitate political and economic cooperation.
2. While political considerations continue to be important, trade and economic
imperatives are assuming increasing significance in the expansion and conduct of
Bhutan’s diplomatic relations. Its policy, however, continues to be deliberate and
purposeful, keeping in mind the resource constraints and actual needs and interests.
3. Bilateral relations with India continue to be an important aspect of Bhutan’s foreign
policy, both politically and economically. The two countries share strong historical,
geographical, political, economic, religious, and cultural ties. India was the first
country with which Bhutan established diplomatic relations in 1968 and has been
assisting Bhutan in its planned development since the inception of the planned
development since 1961. Cooperation in the development of the hydropower sector
in Bhutan is the centerpiece of the mutually beneficial economic cooperation
between Bhutan and India. The close cooperation has now also extended to space
with the two countries jointly collaborating on the development of a satellite to be
launched in 2021.
4. In the immediate region, Bhutan has diplomatic relations with all the member states
of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) and enjoys very
good bilateral relations with them. Bhutan established diplomatic relations with
Bangladesh in 1973, Nepal in 1983, Maldives in 1984, Sri Lanka in 1987, Pakistan in
1988 and Afghanistan in 2010.
5. Since the 1980s, the region of East and South-East Asia has featured prominently in
the expansion of Bhutan’s bilateral relations, particularly to enhance trade and
development cooperation. Bhutan established diplomatic relations with Japan in
1986, South Korea in 1987, Thailand in 1989, Singapore in 2002, Indonesia in 2011,
Mongolia, Vietnam and Myanmar in 2012.
6. In West Asia, Bhutan established diplomatic relations with Kuwait in 1983, Bahrain in
1992, United Arab Emirates in 2012, Armenia in 2012, Turkey in 2012, Kazakhstan
in 2012, Tajikistan in 2012, Azerbaijan in 2013, Oman in 2013 and Israel in 2020.
7. In Europe, Bhutan established diplomatic relations with the European Union, the
Netherlands, Denmark, Sweden, Switzerland and Norway in 1985, Finland in 1986,
6
Austria in 1989, Belgium in 2009, Spain, Luxembourg, Czech Republic and Serbia in
2011, Andorra, Slovenia, Slovakia, Poland in 2012 and Germany in 2020.
8. In the Americas, Bhutan established diplomatic relations with Canada in 2003, Brazil
in 2009, Cuba in 2011, Argentina, Costa Rica and Colombia in 2012.
9. In Africa, Bhutan has established diplomatic relations with Morocco, Mauritius,
Eswatini and Egypt in 2012.
10.In Oceania, Bhutan established diplomatic relations with Australia in 2002 and Fiji in
2011.
11.Today, Bhutan enjoys diplomatic relations with 54 countries and the European
Union. There are currently 14 countries that have appointed Honorary
Consuls/Honorary Consuls General in Bhutan and Bhutan is represented by 14
Honorary Consuls/Honorary Consuls General abroad. The Royal Government is in
the process of appointing 4 additional Honorary Consuls abroad.
12.Bhutan hosts three resident Embassies (India, Bangladesh and Kuwait), as well as
the Consulate General of India in Phuentsholing. There is also the presence of The
Royal Thai Consulate General’s Office, Japan International Cooperation Agency
(JICA), Korean International Cooperation Agency (KOICA), Austrian Coordination
Bureau (ACB), Bhutan Canada Foundation (BCF), Netherlands Development
Organization (SNV), Pro-Bhutan Association, Helvetas, Australian volunteers
program and Bhutan Foundation offices in Bhutan.
13.The Royal Government’s policy on expansion of diplomatic relations is deliberate
and gradual, and closely aligned to the country’s capacity and needs. But at the
same time, Bhutan strives to enhance friendly relations and engagements with all
countries, with or without diplomatic relations, and this engagement has been
expanding rapidly in recent years. Today, we engage meaningfully with many major
economic and political powers, including the United States with which we cooperate
on a number of areas in the educational, economic and social fields.
14.In the vicinity, we have friendly and cooperative relations with the People’s Republic
of China, which is Bhutan’s immediate neighbor to the north. Bhutan supports the
“One China Policy” and engages with China on issues of common interest. Cultural
exchanges and trainings are areas in which the two countries cooperate, in addition
to trade and tourism which in recent times have seen a substantial increase. The two
countries also cooperate on issues of common interest in the United Nations and
other international fora.
7
15.Bhutan and China have been having boundary talks since 1984. Twenty four rounds
of talks at ministerial level have been held in addition to nine rounds of discussions
at the experts level. The 10th Expert Group Meeting and the 25th Boundary Talks are
​ ​
expected to be held soon. The boundary talks also provide a channel for exchanges
on other matters of common interest between the two countries.
IV. MULTILATERAL ENGAGEMENTS
1. As a small landlocked developing country, multilateral engagement is an important
aspect of Bhutan’s foreign policy both in political and economic spheres.
2. The first multilateral organization Bhutan joined was the Colombo Plan in 1962. This
membership enabled Bhutan to avail of the much-needed technical and economic
assistance to carry out its development plans. Bhutan’s membership to the United
Nations in 1971 is the biggest milestone in its multilateral engagement.
3. Today, Bhutan is a member to over 95 International organizations including
international and regional sports organizations. Bhutan is also a State Party to 122
International instruments. While many of these treaties and conventions have limited
relevance for now, the Royal Government of Bhutan has subscribed to a number of
such treaties and conventions as an expression of Bhutan’s solidarity with the
international community and to demonstrate its commitment to the rule of law. The
Royal Government will continue its efforts to become a State Party to all relevant
multilateral conventions and treaties, taking into consideration its national interest
and implementing capacity.
4. Bhutan is also a member of important groupings such as the Group of 77 (G77), the
Least Developed Countries (LDC) and the Landlocked Developing Countries (LLDC)
which are important in advancing Bhutan’s interest as they provide a collective voice
and strength in international political and security matters as well as economic and
social issues.
5. Bhutan will continue to engage meaningfully with the member states of the UN, its
specialized agencies and other multilateral organizations to promote goodwill and
cooperation in order to promote international peace, prosperity and security.
6. As an expression of the importance attached by Bhutan in its multilateral
engagements and solidarity with the international community, Bhutan continues to
seek membership in relevant groupings within the UN and other international
organizations. Bhutan has also sought membership to new groupings at the UN
such as the Friends of Mountains, Alliance of Civilization and Alliance for Poverty.
8
7. Under the United Nations systems, Bhutan hosts the country offices of the UNDP,
UNICEF, WFP, WHO, FAO, UNFPA, UNODC, WWF, ICAO and the World Bank.
There is also the presence of the IFC and Save the Children offices in Bhutan.
V. REGIONAL ENGAGEMENTS
1. It is imperative for Bhutan to engage at the regional level to safeguard and promote
its national interests. Such platforms also provide opportunity for Bhutan to regularly
meet and interact with leaders, officials and professionals from member countries to
learn and share experiences and information.
2. At the regional and sub-regional level, Bhutan joined the Colombo Plan in 1962,
Bhutan is a founding member of South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
(SAARC) which was established in 1985. Bhutan joined the Bay of Bengal Initiative
for Multi-sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation(BIMSTEC) in 2004 and the
Asia Cooperation Dialogue (ACD) in 2005. In addition to these, Bhutan is also a
member of numerous other regional organizations such as ICIMOD, AFoCO and
ABU.
3. The Secretariat of the SAARC Development Fund (SDF) is located in Thimphu and
the Asian Development Bank (ADB) also has an office in Bhutan.
V. CONSULAR ENGAGEMENTS
1. An important aspect of Bhutan’s foreign policy is to facilitate and provide assistance
to members of the diplomatic missions and foreigners in Bhutan and Bhutanese
travelling and residing overseas. With the increasing number of foreigners visiting
Bhutan and more Bhutanese travelling and living abroad, the need to keep up and
upgrade the consular services has also increased.
2. The Royal Government continues to provide appropriate courtesies to visiting
dignitaries and improve consular services including providing better and streamlined
services to Bhutanese travelling and living abroad.
VI. FOCUS AREAS
1. Bhutan will continue to pursue and promote Gross National Happiness for the
sustainable development of the country.
2. On the political front, Bhutan’s foremost foreign policy priority is to safeguard the
Kingdom’s sovereignty, territorial integrity, security and unity. Any foreign policy
9
endeavour shall be consistent and serve to enhance, strengthen and protect this
priority.
3. On the socio-economic front, Bhutan has made remarkable progress since the
implementation of planned development in 1961. However, as a small, landlocked,
and least developed country, Bhutan continues to face numerous challenges and
structural impediments that contribute to its economic vulnerability. Bhutan is slated
​
to graduate from the UN Least Developed Countries category in 2023. In order to
make graduation successful and sustainable, the country’s efforts are focused on
building economic resilience and productive capacity, and this requires the strong
support of development partners. Bhutan has also adopted the 21st Century
​
Economic Roadmap and for its realization, economic diplomacy will play an
important role.
4. On the bilateral front, Bhutan will continue to promote and maintain friendly relations
with countries and expand engagements with all partners in keeping with our
priorities and challenges.
5. On the multilateral front, Bhutan will engage effectively with the international
community to safeguard international peace and security, respect international laws
and norms and collaborate in addressing global issues and challenges. Bhutan will
continue to actively broaden its engagement in UN peacekeeping.
6. On the regional front, Bhutan will continue to pursue a constructive and purposeful
engagement while remaining mindful of the political and resource constraints.
7. On the consular front, Bhutan will continue to streamline and improve service
delivery to the Bhutanese diaspora and the international community in Bhutan by
developing an e-consular system and strengthening institutional capacity.
8. Recognizing that science, technology and innovation are key to economic and social
development, Bhutan will aim to incorporate science and technology diplomacy more
firmly into its foreign policy. The advancement of scientific and technological
capabilities will enable further development within the country and in achieving the
SDGs, and also contribute to international collaboration to address national and
global issues.
VII. ROLE OF THE MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (MFA)
1. The MFA has been entrusted with the mandate and responsibility to implement
Bhutan’s foreign relations in keeping with the guiding principles, the vision, mission
and objectives of its foreign policy.
10
2. The MFA is the formal channel of communication of the Royal Government with all
foreign governments, organizations and entities.
3. The MFA conducts Bhutan’s relations with bilateral, multilateral and international
organizations on the basis of its national interests and in accordance with
international law, norms and practices.
4. The MFA shall take an active role in advancing Bhutan’s economic agenda by
interfacing with existing and new partners.
5. The MFA shall provide protocol courtesies and consular services.
6. The Permanent Missions of the Kingdom of Bhutan, the Royal Bhutanese
Embassies and Royal Bhutanese Consulates are the field offices of the MFA
through which the foreign policy objectives are further carried out on the ground.
***
11

========== Handbook-on-Protocol-Practice.pdf ==========

HANDBOOK ON
PROTOCOL PRACTICE
MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
Ministry of Foreign Affairs ROYAL GOVERNMENT OF BHUTAN
Royal Government of Bhutan THIMPHU
Thimphu
2020
www.mfa.gov.bt
PABX: +975-2-328183/ 322459/322473
HANDBOOK ON
PROTOCOL PRACTICE
MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
ROYAL GOVERNMENT OF BHUTAN
THIMPHU
2020
དཔལ་ལྡན་འབྲུག་གཞུང་། ཕྱི་འབྲེལ་ལྷན་ཁག།
MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
ROYAL GOVERNMENT OF BHUTAN
THIMPHU, BHUTAN
FOREIGN SECRETARY
FOREWORD
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) is pleased to
bring out this Handbook on Protocol Practice which
is being developed based on Bhutanese culture &
values and international norms & best practices. The
Handbook covers the protocol standards, entitlements &
ceremonials for the visit of Heads of State/Government,
Mission & International Organization & other dignitaries
and responsibility of the Department of Protocol, MFA.
The Handbook essentially sets out basic protocol procedures to be followed and
is expected to resolve frequently asked questions or issues on protocol matters
with regard to the visit of Heads of State/Government and other dignitaries. The
Handbook is also expected to ensure that the visit of Heads of State/Government,
and other dignitaries is seamless, memorable and successful.
MFA wishes to inform that this Handbook is only a guiding document for MFA
and other relevant stakeholders and in no way a legally binding document. There
may also be deviation from the handbook depending on the exigencies of a visit.
The Handbook is available on the Ministry’s website at www.mfa.gov.bt.
(Ambassador Kinga Singye)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter 1: Preliminary 1
Chapter 2: Category of Visit and Entitlement 1
Chapter 3: Ceremony for Visit of Head of Delegation 5
Chapter 4: Organization of Visit 8
Chapter 5: Presentation of Credentials 10
Chapter 6: Miscellaneous 16
Chapter 7: Rules of Construction and Amendment 16
Chapter 8: Definition 17
Annex I 19
Annex II 20
Annex III 21
Annex IV 22
Annex V 24
Annex VI 25
Chapter 1: Preliminary
Title
This document shall be called as the Handbook on Protocol Practice and shall
be referred to as The Handbook hereafter.
Adoption
The Royal Government of Bhutan adopted the Handbook during the 80th
Session of the third Lhengye Zhungtshog held on 23rd Day of the 10th Month of
Iron Male Rat Year of the Bhutanese Calendar corresponding to the 8th Day of
the December, 2020.
Application
This Handbook applies to the visit of Heads of State/Government, Mission and
International Organization and other dignitaries.
Objective
The Handbook is aimed at setting a common standard for the organization
of visits and ensuring effective communication and coordination among the
relevant stakeholders. The Handbook is based on the Bhutanese context and
international best practices.
Chapter 2: Category of Visit and Entitlement
I. Visit by Head of Delegation
State Visit
1. The Royal Government shall provide:
a. hospitality to the Head of Delegation, dependent(s) and other ten
members of the delegation or based on the principle of reciprocity.
b. ceremonial motorcade and the sequence shall be as per Annex I.
1
2. The list of officials and the order of precedence for reception/see-off line
at the point of entry/exit during welcome/departure ceremonies shall be as
follows:
a. Representative of His Majesty The King;
b. Prime Minister;
c. Foreign Minister;
d. Minister-in-waiting;
e. Chief Operations Officer;
f. Foreign Secretary;
g. Secretary of relevant agency;
h. Chief of Police;
i. Heads of Mission;
j. Head of United Nations;
k. Dzongdag of concerned Dzongkhag; and
l. Other official(s) as deemed appropriate.
3. The list of officials and the order of precedence for reception/see-off line at
the place of stay shall be as follows:
a. Cabinet Minister;
b. Government ; and
c. Other official(s) as deemed appropriate.
4. His Majesty The King may:
a. grant an audience to the visiting Head of Delegation; and/or
b. host a Royal banquet for the visiting Head of Delegation.
5. Prime Minister shall:
a. call-on the visiting head of state; and
b. host a state banquet in honor of the visiting head of government.
2
6. Visiting head of government shall call-on the Prime Minister.
7. Other call-ons and meetings shall be as per the wishes of the Head of
Delegation.
8. Head of Delegation may pay tribute to His Majesty The Third King of Bhutan
at the National Memorial Chorten.
Official Visit
9. The Royal Government shall provide ceremonial motorcade and the
sequence shall be as per Annex II.
10. The list of officials and the order of precedence for reception/see-off line at
the point of entry/exit shall be as follows:
a. Prime Minister;
b. Foreign Minister;
c. Minister-in-waiting;
d. Foreign Secretary;
e. Chief of Protocol;
f. Heads of Mission;
g. Dzongdag of concerned Dzongkhag; and
h. Other official(s) as deemed appropriate.
11. The list of officials and the order of precedence for the reception/see-off line
at the place of stay shall be as follows:
a. Cabinet Minister
b. Government Secretary and
c. Other official(s) as deemed appropriate.
3
12. Prime Minister shall:
a. call-on the visiting head of state; and
b. host an official lunch/dinner in honor of the visiting Head of Delegation.
13. Visiting head of government shall call-on the Prime Minister.
Private Visit
14. Cabinet Minister or equivalent rank shall receive/see-off the head of
delegation at the point of entry/exit.
15. Protocol, security and other logistical arrangements shall be facilitated as
appropriate.
II. Visit by Other Dignitary
16. The visit shall take place under the aegis of the host agency.
17. The host agency shall provide or facilitate all necessary logistical
arrangements including protocol services in consultation with the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs.
III. Entitlement
18. The entitlement for the visit of Head of Delegation and Other Dignitary
shall be as per Annex III.
19. This entitlement shall be applicable only if the visit is for official purpose and
hosted by the Royal Government.
4
Chapter 3: Ceremony for Visit of Head of Delegation
Welcome and Departure
20. A red carpet with appropriate decoration shall be laid from the base of the
aircraft ladder to the Guard of Honor and Ceremonial Lounge.
21. The Chief of Protocol of the host country and the Chief of Protocol/Head of
Mission of the visiting country shall enter the aircraft, introduce themselves
to the Head of Delegation and request them to alight from the aircraft.
22. The Head of Delegation and his spouse shall be presented with flower
bouquets.
23. A representative of His Majesty The King / Prime Minister shall receive the
Head of Delegation at the foot of the aircraft ladder.
24. A Guard of Honor shall be presented to the Head of Delegation at the point
of entry or Tashichhodzong.
25. The Chief of Protocol shall invite the Head of Delegation and representative
of His Majesty The King / Prime Minister to the Saluting Dais for the
presentation of the Guard of Honor.
26. The Commander of the Guard of Honor shall present arms to the Head
of Delegation and National Anthems of the two countries shall be played.
The National Anthem of the visiting country shall precede that of the host
country. The Commander shall escort the Head of Delegation to inspect the
Guard of Honor.
27. The Chief of Protocol shall introduce the reception line up to the Head of
Delegation, usher to the Ceremonial Lounge for refreshments and escort the
Head of Delegation to the ceremonial motorcade.
5
28. The Head of Delegation shall travel in a ceremonial motorcade to the point
of exit at the time of departure. A Guard of Honor may be presented to the
visiting dignitary at the point of exit. After the inspection of the Guard of
Honor, the Chief of Protocol shall escort the Head of Delegation until the
foot of the aircraft ladder.
Royal Audience
29. The motorcade shall be:
a. received at the South Gate of Tashichhodzong by the Dzongdag of
Thimphu Dzongkhag and Deputy Chief of Protocol.
b. led by a Chipdrel procession.
30. The Head of Delegation shall:
a. walk and follow the Chipdrel procession upon alighting from the vehicle
at the Dzong’s parking;
b. be received by the Aide-de-Camp to His Majesty The King and the Chief
of Protocol at the main entrance; and
c. be escorted by the Aide-de-Camp to His Majesty The King and Chief of
Protocol through the South Courtyard for the Royal audience.
State Banquet
31. Protocol Officers shall receive and conduct the invitees into the Reception
Hall. Invitees shall wait in line at the Reception Hall for the Head of
Delegation and the host.
32. The Chief of Protocol shall conduct the Head of Delegation and the host to
the Reception Hall.
33. The Head of Delegation and the host shall be invited to stand on a carpet
specially placed for them in the Reception Hall. National Anthems of the
visiting and host countries shall be played respectively.
6
34. The Chief of Protocol of the host country shall introduce Bhutanese
dignitaries to the Head of Delegation. The Chief of Protocol/Head of Mission
of the visiting country shall present their entourage to the host.
35. The Protocol Officers shall then conduct the invitees into the Banquet Hall.
36. The invitees shall stand behind their chairs in the Banquet Hall as per the
seating plan. The Chief of Protocol shall escort the Head of Delegation and
the host to their respective seats in the Banquet Hall.
37. The host shall propose a toast to the Head of Delegation and vice versa.
38. The Head of Delegation shall take leave of the host and proceed to his vehicle
after the banquet.
Signing
39. The flags of the visiting and host countries shall be placed appropriately
(behind or on the side). The table flags shall however be placed on the
respective tables.
40. The Head of Delegation shall be seated on the right hand side of His Majesty
the King/ Prime Minister.
41. The signatories shall greet each other and remain standing at the signing
table in front of the Head of Delegation and His Majesty The King/Prime
Minister.
42. The Master of Ceremonies shall announce the name of the document and
the signatories.
43. The signatories shall take their designated seats and sign the document. The
dealing officials shall assist in completing all the signing formalities.
44. The signatories shall stand, congratulate each other, exchange the signed
document and pose for a photo.
7
Chapter 4: Organization of Visit
45. The Department of Protocol shall initiate the preparation of programme and
other associated arrangements in coordination with relevant stakeholders
for the visit of the Head of Delegation.
Programme
46. The Department of Protocol shall:
a. prepare a detailed programme in the form of a booklet.
b. share the draft programme in advance through the mission of the visiting
country and the booklet on arrival.
c. distribute the programme to the Bhutanese delegation and other relevant
officials.
d. prepare a separate programme for the visiting spouse, unless otherwise
agreed.
47. The content of the booklet shall include the itinerary, composition of
the delegation, motorcade plan, essential telephone numbers and other
information as necessary.
Transportation
48. The Department of Protocol shall provide transport during the visit.
However, extension of transportation to the delegation shall depend on the
composition of the delegation.
49. A separate luggage van shall be arranged for the Head of Delegation.
Security
50. The requirement and number of security arrangements shall be jointly
decided by the Department of Protocol and the Royal Bhutan Police.
51. The visiting country shall seek prior approval for the use of firearms, mobile
radio equipment and other security devices from relevant agency(s) through
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
8
Customs and Immigration
52. The Department of Protocol shall facilitate or complete all customs and
immigration formalities for the delegation.
Gift
53. The Department of Protocol shall facilitate the exchange of gift between the
Head of Delegation and Royal Family Member/Head of State/Government.
Media Coverage
54. The modality of the press conferences, briefings, photo opportunities, mode
of communication and interpretation shall be jointly decided by the media
representatives of the visiting and host countries.
Engagements outside the capital
55. Engagements outside the capital shall be organized by the Department of
Protocol in coordination with the local authorities.
Flag/Portrait
56. During the state visit, flags of the visiting and host countries and portraits
of the Head of Delegation and His Majesty The King / Prime Minister shall
be displayed at the point of entry/exit, place of stay, venue and other places
as appropriate.
Information from the Visiting Side
57. The Department of Protocol shall obtain the following information in
advance from the visiting country.
i. Personal details of the visiting guest and spouse (if accompanying)
a. Name.
b. Designation.
c. Curriculum Vitae.
d. Blood Group.
e. Medical History.
f. Dietary Restrictions.
9
ii. Composition of delegation including media and Advance Teams and
interpreter (if required).
a. Travel Itinerary.
b. National Anthem and Flag:
c. A copy of the musical score and recording of the national anthem.
d. Personal standard flag (if any) and a sample of house flag, car flag
and table flag.
iii. Security and communication devices.
a. Names and passport details of persons carrying security and
communication devices.
b. Details (Name, Type, Number, Serial Number, Model, Rounds of
ammunition etc.) of security and communication devices.
Chapter 5: Presentation of Credentials
Presentation of Credentials by Ambassador-Designate of Mission
Order of Precedence
58. The order of precedence for presentation of credentials by ambassador-
designates on the same day shall be based on the date of the agrément. In the
event that the date of agrément falls on the same day, the order of precedence
shall be based on alphabetical order of the sending states.
Arrival
59. The Ambassador-designate shall be received by the Deputy Chief of Protocol
and Protocol Officer at the base of the aircraft.
60. The Protocol Officer shall complete all immigration, custom and other
formalities.
10
Ceremony
61. The Chief of Protocol shall, in advance:
a. brief the ambassador-designate of resident and non-resident mission on
the credential ceremony;
b. receive true copies of the letter of credence of the ambassador-designate;
and
c. receive letter of recall of his predecessor.
62. The Ambassador-designate shall be:
a. accompanied by a protocol officer from his place of stay to Tashich-
hodzong in a convoy led by a police pilot.
b. received by Deputy Chief of Protocol at the Dzong’s parking and pro-
ceed with the Chhipdrel procession.
c. received by the Aide-de-Camp to His Majesty The King and the Chief of
Protocol at the main entrance of Tashichhodzong.
d. received by the Zimpon at the base of the stairs leading to the outer
chamber of the Throne Room.
e. introduced to the officials of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs by the Chief
of Protocol.
f. ushered to the Royal Waiting Room.
63. The officials of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs shall enter the Throne Room
and take their seats on the left-hand side of the Throne.
64. The spouse of the Ambassador-designate and accompanying delegates shall
be ushered by the Deputy Chief of Protocol and take their seats at the right
hand side of the Throne.
65. The Zimpon shall report the arrival of the Ambassador-designate to His
Majesty The King.
11
66. The Ambassador-designate shall:
a. enter the Throne Room escorted by the Chief of Protocol.
b. stand facing the Throne with the Chief of Protocol to his right.
c. be presented to His Majesty The King by the Chief of Protocol.
d. present the Letter of Credence wrapped in a ceremonial scarf to His
Majesty The King.
e. be seated on the right side of the Throne.
67. The Chief of Protocol shall be seated next to the officials of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs.
68. The Zimpon shall:
a. usher the state monks to the Throne Room;
b. announce the traditional ceremony; and
c. conduct Marchang and Zhugdrel.
69. The state monks shall leave the Throne Room, whereas others present shall
rise and remain standing after the conclusion of the traditional ceremony.
70. His Majesty The King shall:
a. greet the Ambassador and the Ambassador shall present his accompa-
nying delegation.
b. grant an audience followed by a photo opportunity.
71. The Ambassador shall:
a. leave the Throne Room accompanied by the Chief of Protocol.
b. be seen-off by the Aide-de-Camp to His Majesty The King from the
Tashichoddzong courtyard.
c. be escorted to his place of stay by protocol officer.
12
Call on
72. The Ambassador shall call on to:
a. Prime Minister of Bhutan.
b. Foreign Minister.
c. Foreign Secretary.
d. Other Ministers and officials as deemed appropriate.
Reception
73. A reception shall be hosted in honour of the Ambassador by the Foreign
Minister.
Departure
74. The Ambassador shall be seen-off by the Deputy Chief of Protocol and
Protocol Officer at the base of the aircraft.
75. The Protocol Officer shall complete all immigration, customs and other
formalities.
Use of Flag
76. The national flags of Bhutan and the country of Ambassador-designate shall
be carried /displayed during/at the:
a. chhipdrel procession.
b. main entrance of Tashichhodzong.
c. entrance of the Throne Room.
d. reception.
77. The national flag of the country of the Ambassador shall be flown on his car
after the presentation of the credentials.
Layout
78. The layout in the throne room and the Grand Kuenray Hall shall be as per
Annex IV.
13
Presentation of Credentials by Head-Designate of International Organization
79. The Deputy Chief of Protocol shall, in advance:
a. brief the head-designate of International Organization,
b. receive true copies of the letter of appointment of the head-designate;
and
c. receive letter of recall of his predecessor.
80. The Head-designate shall be:
a. accompanied by a Protocol Officer from his place of work to the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs.
b. received by the relevant Head of Department and Deputy Chief of
Protocol.
81. Senior officials of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, state monks and
accompanying officials of the Head-designate shall stand in line in the
Ceremony Hall till the arrival of the Foreign Minister.
82. Officials of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs shall be seated on the left-hand
side of the Foreign Minister.
83. The accompanying officials shall be seated on the right-hand side of the
Foreign Minister.
84. The Deputy Chief of Protocol shall announce the arrival of the Head-
designate to the Foreign Minister.
85. The Head-designate shall:
a. enter the Ceremony Hall escorted by the Deputy Chief of Protocol.
b. stand facing the Hall with the Deputy Chief of Protocol to his right.
c. be presented to the Foreign Minister by the Deputy Chief of Protocol.
d. present the Letter of Appointment wrapped in a ceremonial scarf to the
Foreign Minister.
e. be seated on the right side of the Foreign Minister.
14
86. The Deputy Chief of Protocol shall:
a. announce the traditional ceremony.
b. conduct Marchang and Zhugdrel.
87. The state monks shall leave the Hall, whereas others present shall rise and
remain standing after the conclusion of the traditional ceremony.
88. The Foreign Minister shall greet the Head of International Organization. The
Head shall then introduce accompanying officials to the Foreign Minister.
89. The Deputy Chief of Protocol shall introduce the officials of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs to the Head of International Organization.
90. The Foreign Minister and the Head shall exchange brief remarks and leave
the Ceremony Hall.
91. The Head shall be:
a. seen-off by relevant Head of Department and Deputy Chief of Protocol.
b. accompanied by Protocol Officer from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
to his place of work.
Reception
92. A reception shall be hosted in honour of the Head of International
Organization by the Foreign Secretary.
Use of Flag
93. The national flag of Bhutan and the flag of the International Organization
shall be displayed in/at the:
a. Ceremonial Hall.
b. reception.
15
94. The flag of the respective International Organization shall be flown on his
car after the presentation of the credentials.
Layout
95. The layout in the Ceremony Hall shall be as per Annex V.
Chapter 6: Miscellaneous
Routine and Farewell Visits by Ambassador and Head of International
Organization.
96. Protocol Officer shall receive and see off the Ambassador and Head of
International Organization from the VIP lounge during routine visit.
97. Deputy Chief of Protocol and Protocol Officer shall receive and see off the
Ambassador and Head of International Organization from the Ceremonial
Lounge during farewell visit.
Responsibility of Department of Protocol
98. The responsibilities of the Department of Protocol for the purpose of this
handbook shall be as detailed in Annex VI.
Chapter 7: Rules of Construction and Amendment
99. In this Handbook, unless the context indicates otherwise, the singular shall
include plural and the masculine shall include feminine.
100. Amendment to this Handbook and its annexes shall be effected by the
Department of Protocol.
16
Chapter 8: Definition
101. Unless the context otherwise requires, the terms used in this Guidelines
shall have the following meanings assigned as hereunder:
i. Agency: Ministry/organization other than the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs.
ii. Ceremony: Ceremonial event at the time of welcome/ departure/ Royal
Audience/ State Banquet/signing/Presentation of Credentials.
iii. Chief Operations Officer: Head of Royal Bhutan Army.
iv. Chief of Police: Head of Royal Bhutan Police.
v. Dependent: Spouse and children of Head of Delegation.
vi. Dignitary: Official other than the head of delegation listed in the
Entitlement Chart.
vii. Document: Agreement or memorandum of understanding signed
during the state or official visit.
viii. Head: Person appointed as resident coordinator of the UN systems in
Bhutan, country representative, resident representative and head of
international or regional organization.
ix. Head of Delegation: Visiting King/Queen/Crown Prince and Head of
State/Government.
x. International Organization: The United Nations and its specialized
agencies, other international and regional organizations.
xi. Mission: Resident and non-resident Embassy and Consulate.
xii. Official Visit: Visit by Head of Delegation attending multilateral and
regional conferences/meetings/seminars/summits/forum, etc.
17
xiii. Point of entry/exit: A place in the territory of Bhutan where the Head
of Delegation and other dignitaries arrive and depart during the visit.
xiv. Prime Minister: Prime Minister of Bhutan.
xv. Private Visit: Visit by present/former King/Queen/Crown Prince and
Head of State/Government for reason(s) other than official purpose(s).
xvi. Royal Government: Royal Government of Bhutan.
xvii. State Visit: Any formal visit by or at the level of King/Queen/Crown
Prince and Head of State/Government.
18
Annex I
CEREMONIAL MOTORCADE FOR STATE VISIT
The composition and sequence of the motorcade for the State Visit of Head of
Delegation is as follows:
1. Advance Pilot.
2. Press Van.
3. Pilot.
4. Chief of Protocol of Visiting and Host Countries.
5. Outriders.
6. Uniform Security.
7. VVIP.
8. Uniform Security.
9. Visiting Security.
10. VVIP Spare Car.
11. Protocol Officer.
12. Prime Minister.
13. Minister-in-waiting.
14. Ambassador of Visiting Country.
15. Ambassador of Host Country.
16. Delegation.
17. Ambulance.
18. VVIP Luggage Van.
19. Tail Car.
19
Annex II
CEREMONIAL MOTORCADE FOR OFFICIAL VISIT
The composition and sequence of the motorcade for the Official Visit of Head of
Delegation is as follows:
1. Pilot.
2. Chief of Protocol.
3. Uniform Security.
4. VVIP.
5. Uniform Security.
6. Spare car.
7. Minister-in-waiting.
8. Ambassador of Visiting Country.
9. Ambassador of Host Country.
10. Delegation.
11. Ambulance.
12. VVIP Luggage Van.
13. Tail Car.
20
21
III
xennA
TRAHC
TNEMELTITNE
YTILATIPSOH
PIV
lainomereC
pukcaB
-eS
lanosreP
locotorP
eciloP
-atropsnarT
-ommoccA
slaeM
rotisiV
#IS
egnuoL
egnuoL
elciheV
recffiO
ytiruc
recffiO
toliP
noit
noitad
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
ylimaF
layoR
ngieroF
1
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
.ylimaF
layoR
eht
fo tseuG
2
oN
seY
seY
seY
seY
seY
seY
seY
seY
.tnemnrevoG/etatS
fo daeH
3
oN
seY
seY
seY
seY
seY
seY
seY
seY
.tsop
tnelaviuqe
dna
retsiniM
4
oN
seY
oN
seY
seY
seY
seY
seY
seY
.retsiniM
ytupeD
5
oN
seY
oN
seY
seY
seY
seY
seY
seY
.retsiniM
eciV
6
seY
oN
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
.retsiniM
emirP
eht
fo tseuG
7
-nrevoG/etatS
fo
daeH
remroF
oN
seY
seY
seY
seY
seY
seY
seY
seY
8
.tnem
seY
oN
oN
oN
seY
oN
seY
*
oN
.tnemnrevoG
eht
ot
seiraterceS
9
eht
nO
dna
CoP
rof
srodassabmA
oN
seY
oN
oN
seY
fo
yad
seY
*
oN
01
.lleweraf
CoP
seY
oN
oN
oN
seY
oN
seY
*
oN
.tisiv
enituor
no
srodassabmA
11
srodassabmA
detidercca-noN
seY
oN
oN
oN
*
oN
*
*
oN
21
.)snoissiM
fo daeH(
-inagrO
lanoitanretnI
fo sdaeH
*
*
oN
oN
*
oN
*
*
oN
31
.noitaz
*
*
*
*
seY
*
seY
*
*
.syovnE
laicepS
41
seY
oN
oN
oN
oN
oN
oN
*
oN
.lareneG
lusnoC
yraronoH
51
fo
srebmeM
&
seeyolpmE
seY
oN
oN
oN
oN
oN
oN
*
oN
61
.noitaicossA
pihsdneirF
.yticorpicer
/ssenetairporppa
/sevitcerid
eht
rep
sA
*
Annex IV
Annex IV
L ALAYYOOUUTT
a) PresentAat)io Pn roefs Cernetdaetniotinal so ifn Cthree Tdhernotniae lRs oionm t he Throne Room
A=Ambassador-Designate
A=Ambassador-Designate
B B==CChhiieeff ooff PPrroottoococlo l
21
22
B) Presentation of Credentials in the Grand Kuenrey Hall
b) Presentation of Credentials in the Grand Kuenrey Hall
(*Minimum of four Ambassador-designates for PoC in the Grand Kuenrey Hall)
(*Minimum of four Ambassador-designates for PoC in the Grand Kuenrey Hall)
AD= Ambassador-Designate
AD= Ambassador-Designate
A=Ambassador-Designate
A B==AChmiebf aosf sPardootorc-oDl esignate
B=Chief of Protocol
22
23
Annex V
Annex V
LAYOUT
LAYOUT
Presentation of Credentials in the ceremony hall
Presentation of Credentials in the ceremony hall
A= HAea=d -HDeeasdig-nDaetes ignate
B= Deputy Chief of Protocol
B= Deputy Chief of Protocol
24
23
Annex VI
RESPONSIBILITIES OF DEPARTMENT OF PROTOCOL
1. Inform all relevant stakeholders (Department of Air Transport, Department
of Immigration, Department of Revenue and Customs, Relevant Ministry/
Dzongkhag(s), Royal Bhutan Police, Department of National Properties,
Dzong Maintenance Division, Department of Culture, Bhutan Power
Corporation, Thimphu Thromde, Ministry of Health, etc.) in written
communication about the visit and their required services.
2. Draft and finalize the program for the visit in consultation with relevant
stakeholders.
3. Requisition of vehicles.
4. Ensure driver’s code of conduct and cleanliness & condition of vehicle.
5. Arrive two hours prior to the arrival of head of delegation and dignitary.
6. Receive and see-off head of delegation and dignitary at the point of entry/
exit.
7. Ensure all arrangements at the airport (Lounge, Refreshments), place of stay
and venue for events are in place.
8. Seek appointments for and accompany during call-ons and meetings of
head of delegation and dignitary.
9. Reconfirm flight schedule.
10. Receive, usher and see-off head of delegation, dignitary and guests during
events hosted by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
11. Distribute invitation cards and confirm the list of invitees.
12. Ensure correct seating and table plans.
25
HANDBOOK ON
PROTOCOL PRACTICE
MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
Ministry of Foreign Affairs ROYAL GOVERNMENT OF BHUTAN
Royal Government of Bhutan THIMPHU
Thimphu
2020
www.mfa.gov.bt
PABX: +975-2-328183/ 322459/322473

========== WP-560-Uttam-Lama-Final.pdf ==========

India and Bhutan:
A Relationship Before
and After Independence
Uttam Lama
065
repaP
gnikroW
India and Bhutan: A Relationship Before and After Independence
Uttam Lama
Published and Printed by: Institute for Social and Economic Change
Dr V K R V Rao Road, Nagarabhavi Post,
Bangalore - 560072, Karnataka, India.
ISEC Working Paper No. 560 May 2023
Institute for Social and Economic Change (ISEC) is engaged in interdisciplinary research
in analytical and applied areas of the social sciences, encompassing diverse aspects of
development. ISEC works with central, state and local governments as well as international
agencies by undertaking systematic studies of resource potential, identifying factors
influencing growth and examining measures for reducing poverty. The thrust areas of
research include state and local economic policies, issues relating to sociological and
demographic transition, environmental issues and fiscal, administrative and political
decentralization and governance. It pursues fruitful contacts with other institutions and
scholars devoted to social science research through collaborative research programmes,
seminars, etc.
The Working Paper Series provides an opportunity for ISEC faculty, visiting fellows and
PhD scholars to discuss their ideas and research work before publication and to get
feedback from their peer group. Papers selected for publication in the series present
empirical analyses and generally deal with wider issues of public policy at a sectoral,
regional or national level. These working papers undergo external review but typically do
not present final research results, and constitute works in progress.
ISEC working papers can be downloaded from the website (www.isec.ac.in).
ISBN 978-93-93879-28-8
© 2023, Copyright Reserved
The Institute for Social and Economic Change,
Bangalore
Working Paper Series Editor: M Balasubramanian
INDIA AND BHUTAN: A RELATIONSHIP BEFORE AND AFTER
INDEPENDENCE
Uttam Lama1
Abstract
India and Bhutan have had a relationship that has lasted for centuries. During the late 18th
century, the East India Company's trade-centric approach, which was primarily focused on
trading with Tibet, is what led to the relationship between India and Bhutan. After India's
Independence in 1947, the focus changed away from trade and concentrated on geopolitical or
strategic challenges. Therefore, the current paper has tried to highlight the transition of the
Indo-Bhutan relationship from the past to the present (1774-2019). Further, the study has
divided Indo-Bhutan relations into pre- and post-Independence sections that have explained the
relationship of Bhutan with British and Independent India. This includes historical treaties and
agreements between India and Bhutan which categorically trace the purpose and policies of East
India Company and Independent India. Further, the study highlights how the focus has shifted
from cross-border trade to geopolitics relations between India and Bhutan. The historical
transition of Indian and Bhutan relations also shows that both have experienced rapport and
disagreements with each other, particularly on geopolitics and political-economy decisions.
Despite many misunderstandings between the two countries, both have always backed each
other during times of need. While most of the South Asian countries have been influenced by
Chinese development policies, only Bhutan has stood with India‘s development policies. Bhutan
has not ever played the China card as other neighbouring countries have done. Therefore, the
study has also suggested that as many countries are supporting Chinese development policies,
India also needs to update its foreign policy in terms of development, particularly in the
neighbouring South Asian countries. This will help to maintain India as a hegemonic power and
may reduce the influence of China among the South Asian countries. Methodologically, the study
explains the issues and makes observations on the topic through descriptive analysis by using
secondary data, official statements, reports and literature etc.
Key Words: Indo-Bhutan relationship, trade, geopolitical, diplomatic issues, development
policies
Introduction
The relations between East India Company (EIC) and Bhutan started officially after the negotiation and
signing of the ‗Peace Treaty‘ in 1774 (Phuntsho, 2013). After the exit of EIC from India, the Peace
Treaty of 1774 was replaced by the Peace and Friendship Treaty of 1949 between Independent India
and Bhutan. The purpose of these relations during the 18th century was to promote trade in the
Himalayan regions (Rajput, 2011). However, later on, the relationship became oriented more towards
geopolitical and strategic purposes after the exit of EIC in 1947 (Murthy, 1999). With the invasion of
Tibet in 1950 by China, the relationship between India and Bhutan shifted from a trade-centric one to
more toward political-economic and strategic standpoints (Rathore, 1974). On the other hand, India and
Bhutan have come together due to national security concerns in order to support one another in
defending their territories from Chinese incursions. Bhutan has known that its small economy and lack
of trained troops in numbers and technology cannot resolve the border issues with China (Rajput,
2014). Therefore, Bhutan was compelled to ask for help from India in terms of national security against
China by signing the 1949 Peace and Friendship Treaty (Article 2).
1 PhD Research Scholar at Institute for Social and Economic Change, Nagarabhavi, Bengaluru-560072.
Article 2 of the 1949 Treaty helped Bhutan by deploying Indian soldiers on the Bhutan-China-
India border. Further, India also has provided arms and ammunition or technologies to the Bhutanese
soldiers. Moreover, India also provided military training to Bhutanese soldiers and Royal Guards through
IMTART (Indian Military Training Team) (Choden, 2004). In addition, India has guided and advised
Bhutan in matters relating to external affairs (Murthy, 1999). China was attracting South Asian countries
through its development-oriented foreign policy which attracted Bhutan too (Samaranayake, 2019). Still,
Bhutan has always favoured India above China in terms of development policy, despite geographical
limitations. Presently, India and Bhutan have a healthy trade and commerce (Stobdan, 2014). Bhutan
also leverages Indian routes and territory for the exchange of goods and services with India and other
nearby nations for trade and other commercial activities (Taneja et al, 2019). Therefore, India
contributes majorly in terms of the economic development of Bhutan. Being a trustworthy friend, India
has helped Bhutan to establish geopolitical ties with South Asian nations and other countries, notably by
facilitating trade over their borders, helping reduce Bhutan's dependence on India.
On the other hand, there has been criticism over the fact that India's development strategy for
Bhutan is based on a capitalist paradigm, with India owning the largest share of the development
projects as per Stobdan (2014) who also mentioned that Bhutan's economy has become dependent on
or an adjunct to India's economic intervention programme, even if the economic approach to Indo-
Bhutan relations has not yet been clearly described in open geopolitical discourse.
Historical background of Indo-Bhutan relationship
The relationship between India and Bhutan can be studied from two perspectives: before and after
India's Independence. The historical relationship between India and Bhutan reveals the trade-centric
relationship of the East India Company. Post-Independent relations between India and Bhutan became
more strategic and diplomacy-centric than trade. Therefore, the changes in the relationship between
India and Bhutan have been identified based on the diplomatic and political-economy situations and
policies. During the 18th century, Lasha (Tibet) was a major trade centre for Asia that attracted many
traders from Asia and Europe to trade, especially in silk, animal skin, beverages, sandal, indigo, etc.
(Sharma & Lal, 2017). Similarly, being neighbour states, Bhutan and Tibet also used to share a good
relationship in terms of sociocultural activities, religions and of course trade and commerce.
By the late 18th century, the British had established their rule over entire India and were
eyeing trade with Tibet through Bhutan. East India Company and Bhutan took on each other during the
Anglo-Bhutanese war in the year 1773. The purpose of this war was to free the Cooch Behar kingdom
from Bhutanese troops at the request of Cooch Behar's king (Nazir Deb). For this purpose, the East
India Company charged Deb Rajah a huge sum. Further, the EIC saw it as a chance to expand their
trade in the Himalayan regions (Phuntsho, 2013). The war between British India and Bhutan concluded
with the Anglo-Bhutanese Treaty in 1774 (Sen, 2015).
India and Bhutan: Pre-Independence Relations (1774-1947)
The relations between British India (East India Company) and Bhutan started after the peace treaty
which was signed between EIC and Bhutan on 25th April 1774. This was the first treaty agreed upon for
2
maintaining peace and friendship between EIC and Bhutan. In fact, the treaty opened the way to the
EIC for trade with Tibet and the Himalayan states. In addition, many agreements were signed between
the EIC and Bhutan before the exit of the EIC from India.
British India and Bhutan (1774-1863)
The treaty solved the land and border issues between Cooch Behar and Bhutan by returning the
occupied lands (i.e. Chitchacotta, Pangolahuat, Kyruntee, Marraguat and Luckypoor) of Bhutan which
belonged to Bhutan (Deb Rajah) before the commencement of the war against Cooch Behar (Rennie,
2005). However, for the eastward land of Chitchacotta, Bhutan charged an annual fee tribute of five
Tangun horses by the EIC which was the acknowledgement paid to the Cooch Behar Rajah (Rajput,
2014). The treaty also allowed Bhutan and Bengal traders to carry out cross-border trade without the
payment of any duties which also included cutting the timber from any part of Bhutan by EIC without
paying any duties. It helped to stop the incursions between the two states‘ territories which developed
trust and friendship between them.
The major objective of the EIC for signing this agreement with Bhutan was to expand its trade
in the Himalayan states. During the 18th century, Lhasa was known for its trading activities. Therefore,
to build trade relations between Bhutan, Lhasa and Bengal (EIC), the Bogle Mission played a vital role.
The First Bogle Mission was sent by EIC to Bhutan and Tibet in 1774. The purpose of this mission was
to establish a channel of communication for trade between Bhutan, Bengal, and Lhasa as well as other
nations nearby (White, 1971). For this, Bhutan played a key role in securing close relations for Indo-
Tibetan trade by giving protection to the Mission or writing a consent letter to Tibet (Tashi Lama).
Bhutan also helped EIC to get guidance and permission for the Company‘s first Mission from Lhasa.
Bogle‘s Mission was successful in terms of establishing trade relations between Bengal, Bhutan and
Tibet which opened the door for trade and commerce in the Himalayan regions for EIC (Debnath,
2010).
However, Bhutan and Tibet had agreed to welcome only Indian traders whereas European and
English traders were restricted to enter and pass through Bhutan to Tibet. On the opposite side,
Bhutanese traders were allowed to trade in any place in Bengal and Rangpur without tax. The major
trading items were sandals, indigo, horses, betel-nut, pan, wool, silk, beverage, skins and tobacco.
(Sen, 2015).
The interaction between EIC and Bhutan was more or less disconnected for almost 50 years
between 1783 and 1826, except for a visit by an Indian official, Krishna Kant Bose, who was sent to
Bhutan by the Judge of Rangpur to try to settle the ongoing boundary disputes. Deb Rajah of Bhutan
had claimed the regions of Ambaree district, Falacotth and Jalpesh under the Bhutan territories. During
the late 18th century, the border dispute between Bhutan and EIC again increased (Kohli, 1982). To
solve the border disputes, EIC sent Hamilton Mission in 1775 to examine the claim of Deb Rajah of
Bhutan (Rajput, 2014). In fact, the EIC observed in 1783 that there was a need to establish and
develop trade relations on a different footing with respect to keeping the views and interests of the
Rajah of Bhutan (Sen, 2015). This was because Bhutan was holding an important position and occupied
3
the northern trade route of India. It was also clear that the Bhutanese held the lever firmly in their
hands.
Even after a long discussion, the settlement of the land dispute between Bhutan and EIC did
not happen. In fact, it increased further during the First Anglo-Burmese war (1824-26). In this war, EIC
drove the Burmese as well as Bhutanese out of Assam. Consequently, EIC occupied more Bhutanese
land including the Assam Duars regions which created border disputes between EIC and Bhutan
resulting in unsatisfactory relations between them (Gait,1906). Further, many incursions and border
attacks happened between Bhutan and EIC. Gradually, Bhutan lost control of the plains of Duars regions
of Assam and was limited to hill regions (Debnath, 2010). After the Bogle reports on tea beverages, the
Company established the tea industry in the Duars regions of Assam and Bengal during the early 19th
century (Phuntsho, 2013). The Duars regions were fertile and favourable for the tea industries.
Therefore, the EIC never intended to return the occupied land but agreed to monetary compensation to
Bhutan. Further, such incidents in Bhutan by the EIC created conflict between them. In fact, during the
revolt of 1857 against British rule by Indian freedom fighters, Bhutan supported Indians (Phuntsho,
2013; Sen, 2015). Between EIC and Bhutan, there were many incidents recorded like stealing and
robberies of castles and other properties by Bhutanese and in retaliation, the burning of the Bhutanese
houses, plunder of properties etc (Kohli, 1982; Rajput, 2014). Such incidents created animosity between
each other and spread to farmers, traders and people in general (White, 1971).
British India and Bhutan (1864-1947)
In order to resolve the tensions between British India and Bhutan, EIC sent Ashley Eden to Bhutan to
discuss the issues and find solutions (Eden, Pemberton & Bose, 1865). In 1864, an agreement was
signed between EIC and Bhutan which brought them together as a friendly neighbouring state again
whose major objective was to maintain the peace between them. Further, it was also agreed that the
offenders who were involved in the violence and crimes against Bhutan and EIC caught by troops would
be surrendered to both authorities. In addition, the relations between the EIC and Bhutan would remain
friendly and that they should not commit any aggression against the subjects, people and traders
visiting their mutual territories and that they should be treated as brothers. Further, it was also agreed
that Bhutan, Sikkim, Cooch Behar and EIC would never invade each other‘s territories (White, 1971). In
case of such incidents occurring, the other states would together support the victim state and retaliate
against the aggressive state (Eden, 1865; White, 1971; Rajput, 2014).
But in a sudden action, Bhutan attacked Dewanagiri in January 1865, in a battle which ended
in the same year in November with the recapture of Dewanagiri (Deothang) by the EIC. This Duar war
compelled both EIC and Bhutan to sign a new treaty. In 1865, the treaty of Sinchula was signed by
them. After the repeated attacks, this treaty tried to re-establish a new relationship between the EIC
and Bhutan. According to this treaty, the Bhutanese lost territory of about 7122 sq. km which also
included the area of Bengal and Assam Duars regions and would thenceforth be permanently included
in the EIC (Rajput, 2014). For that, the British government was to be paid a compensation amount of
50,000 rupees annually (Phuntsho, 2013). In addition, free trade between EIC and Bhutan was to be re-
4
established and criminals on both sides would be handed back to the respective governments (Rajput,
2014; Sen, 2015).
In 1910, Bhutan saw the Chinese forces making incursions inside its borders. China‘s control
over Tibet during 1910 was alarming for Bhutan‘s national security. In fact, China claimed Bhutan as a
feudatory in 1910. This situation concluded with another treaty with British India that Bhutan was to be
guided in its external affairs by the British government but that the latter should not interfere in its
internal affairs (Stobdan, 2014). British India also formally claimed that Bhutan was independent of
China and that its external affairs were under the British government (Rajput, 2014). In addition, the
British government sent a strong note of warning to the Chinese government in 1910 that, ―His
Majesty‘s government cannot allow any administrative changes in Tibet to affect or prejudice that
integrity of Nepal or of the smaller states of Bhutan and Sikkim and is prepared if necessary to protect
the interest and rights of these three states‖ (Rajput, 2014, Stobdan, 2014). The British influence over
Bhutan continued up to 1947.
India and Bhutan: Relations of post-Independence (1947-2020)
The Republic of India and Bhutan's relationship has remained relatively unchanged after India's
Independence in 1947. They have maintained and continued to enjoy a peaceful and friendly
relationship with each other, as the Company and Bhutan had historically. The national security issues
of Bhutan, threats from China and political-economic dependency on India are the major reasons
behind Bhutan's good ties with India over China. Therefore, the first treaty was signed between
Independent India and Bhutan in 1949, known as the ‗Perpetual Peace and Friendship Treaty' (Malik, &
Sheikh, 2016). According to the treaty of 1949, India and Bhutan would always maintain a friendly and
peaceful relationship with each other. Similarly, Bhutan would be guided by India in matters of external
affairs, but both countries agreed that there would be no interference in each other‘s domestic affairs
(Rajput, 2011). In addition, there would be free trade and commerce between the two countries.
Furthermore, the Indian government also agreed to allow Bhutan to use Indian forest roads, land, and
seaports for the transaction of goods and services (Nga et al, 2019). Significantly, the Government of
India did not agree to release Bhutan's occupied land; instead, it agreed to pay compensation in the
amount of Rs 1 lakh each year, which was paid to Bhutan on January 10, 1950, for thirty-two square
miles of territory in the area known as Dewangiri (Penjore, 2004; Nga et al 2019). This was because the
tea industry and forest resources that encompassed these occupied regions had enormous economic
significance.
To enhance trade and commerce and economic activities between India and Bhutan, an
agreement was signed in 1995 (Sen, 2015). This agreement strengthened previous free trade and
service agreements between India and Bhutan and emphasised the expansion of bilateral trade and
collaboration in economic development projects. Significantly, the selling of Bhutan lottery tickets in the
Indian states was permitted, and twelve entry and exit border corridors were officially recognised for
trade and services through this trade & commerce agreement (Rajput, 2011). These corridors are
Jaigaon (road route), Charmurchi (road route), Utliapani (road route), Hatisar, Gaylegphung (road
route), Darranga (road route), Calcutta (air and sea route), Haldia (seaport), Dhubri (riverine route),
5
Raxaul (road and rail route), Panitanki (road route), Changrabandh (road route) and New Delhi (air
route). As per the Ministry of Commerce & Industry (2019), the Jaigaon corridor has recorded the
highest economic transaction (more than 70 per cent) between India and Bhutan and is also considered
the gateway of Bhutan. Moreover, these routes have helped to promote Bhutanese trade & commerce
and ties not only with India but with South Asian countries as well.
This agreement not only strengthened the previous free trade and service agreements
between India and Bhutan, but also emphasised bilateral trade expansion and collaboration in economic
development projects (Bisht, 2010; Shubham 2014). Bhutan has requested India to revise Article 2 of
'The Friendship Treaty of 1949'. Bhutan's request was heard by the Government of India in 2007.
Therefore, as a good friend, Article 2 was revised in 2007 with the mutual agreement of both
governments of India and Bhutan. Since then, India has not been guiding Bhutan in external affairs;
instead, it cooperates closely on issues relating to its national interests (Rajput, 2011; Nga, et al, 2019).
―In keeping with the abiding ties of close friendship and cooperation between Bhutan
and India, the Government of the Kingdom of Bhutan and the Government of the
Republic of India shall cooperate closely with each other on issues relating to their
national interests. Neither government shall allow the use of its territory for activities
harmful to the national security and interest of the other‖ (Revised Article 2, Rajput,
2011 Page No:348).
Trade Relations between India and Bhutan
The close bilateral relations between India and Bhutan have been empowered through trade too. It has
been observed that the trade between them from 2000-01 to 2018-19 has flourished. There is rapid
economic growth and greater economic integration between India and Bhutan. Besides this, it is also
observed that the trade balance has changed in India's favour over the last seven to eight years, and
the gap between India's exports to Bhutan and imports from Bhutan has managed to grow over
the period. Notwithstanding, because of an increase in imports of refined copper wires and refined palm
oil and derivatives in 2006-07 and 2007-08, India ran a trade deficit with Bhutan from 2006-07 to 2010-
11. The following years have observed a steep reduction in the import of these two products, but
ferrosilicon and calcium carbide imports surged quickly and were a major reason for India's imports
exceeding its exports to Bhutan. Similarly, Indian exports to Bhutan have increased in recent years.
6
Table 1: Trade between India and Bhutan (US$ million)
Year India's Exports to Bhutan India's Imports from Bhutan Trade Balance Total Trade
2000-01 1.1 21.1 -20 22.2
2001-02 7.6 23.9 -16.3 31.5
2002-03 39.1 32.2 6.9 71.2
2003-04 89.5 52.4 37.1 141.9
2004-03 84.6 71 13.6 155.6
2005-06 99.2 88.8 10.4 187.9
2006-07 57.7 142.1 -84.4 199.7
2007-08 86.7 194.7 -108 281.5
2008-09 111.2 151.8 -40.6 262.9
2009-10 118.9 153.1 -34.3 272
2010-11 176 201.6 -25.5 377.6
2011-12 229.9 202.6 27.3 432.4
2012-13 233.2 164 69.2 397.2
2013-14 355.6 152.2 203.4 507.8
2014-15 333.9 149.9 184.1 483.8
2015-16 469 281.3 187.7 750.2
2016-17 509.3 307.8 201.5 817.1
2017-18 546.1 377.9 168.2 924.1
2018-19 657.3 369.5 287.8 1,026.80
Source: Directorate General of Foreign Trade, Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Government of India2
According to the Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Bhutan‘s trade with India was rose by
more than 70 per cent during 2018-19 and 2019-20. It shows the economic dependency of Bhutan on
India. India and Bhutan‘s free trade policy provides easy and feasible trade between the neighbouring
countries that also builds strong bilateral relations between them. According to import-export data
between India and Bhutan, India‘s export to Bhutan was the minimum (4.95 per cent) in 2000-01.
However, it gradually increased up to 63.07 per cent till the year 2003-04. On the other hand, the
import from Bhutan also decreased from 95.05 to 36.93 per cent (from 2000-01 to 2003-04). During
these periods Bhutan imported more heavy machinery than agricultural items which helped the
development of hydroelectric power, road, communication and overall infrastructure etc. In addition,
during the years 2005-06 to 2006-07, a sharp decline in India‘s export to Bhutan has been noted.
Further, to maintain the trade balance, export to Bhutan continued to be lower than imports from
Bhutan till 20011-12.
The King of Bhutan abolished the monarchy and instituted a democratic system of government
in the country in the years 2006–2007 (Nga, at. el. 2019).
This affected Bhutan's whole government structure and the country's ability to finance
elections and other democratic procedures. Since a new government body needed at least a year to be
established, Bhutan did not spend much money importing goods and services from India to become
settled. This had an impact on Bhutan's fiscal policy for the 2007–2008 fiscal year. During 2007, the
2 Taneja at. el (2019), ―Indo-Bhutan Economic Relations‖ Working Paper-384, ICRIER.
7
Gorkhaland Movement had started in the northern part of West Bengal. Several strikes, tense situations,
and stalled off-road buses occurred due to the desire for a separate state close to the Indian border.
More than 70 per cent of trade between India and Bhutan goes through the Phuentsholing route, which
was frequently closed as a result of the Gorkhaland Movement that negatively impacted trade. In
addition, during those years, the demand for electricity, machinery and iron and steel, mechanical
appliances etc. decreased in India. On the other hand, India imported copper and articles thereof and
iron and steel or its articles from Bhutan. Moreover, inorganic chemicals and man-made filaments were
also imported from Bhutan.
Figure 1: Import-Export Trade between India and Bhutan (in Percentage)
Source: Directorate General of Foreign Trade, Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Government of India
Throughout the years, major items exported to Bhutan from India were: electrical, machinery
and equipment and parts thereof, iron and steel, article of iron or steel, nuclear reactors, boilers and
mechanical appliances, vehicles, mineral fuels, minerals oils and products of their distillation, bituminous
substances, minerals waxes, cereals, beverages, spirits and vinegar, miscellaneous goods, and salt,
sulphur, stone, plastering materials, lime and cement etc. The major products which were imported
from Bhutan were: Copper and articles thereof, iron and steel, inorganic chemicals, man-made
filaments, animal or vegetable fats, oil and their cleavage products, wood and articles of wood,
beverages, spirit and vinegar, photographic or cinematographic goods miscellaneous, paper and paper
board and so on.
8
Development grants and supports
India has always been supportive towards Bhutan‘s development projects. In fact, this also plays a key
role in the bilateral relationship between them. India is the larger economy as well as a development
partner of Bhutan. Further, India also supports Bhutan‘s Five-Year Plan since its beginning in 1960-61
which helps to develop the overall socio-economic development of Bhutan (Choden, 2004). The details
of development funds and supports have been given below.
Table 2: Indian Budgetary support for Bhutanese Economic Development
Total Allocation India's Contribution % of India's
Year
(in Crore Rs.) (in Crore Rs.) Contribution
1961 – 66 [1st Plan] 10.72 10.72 100%
1966 – 71 [2nd Plan] 20.22 20.22 100%
1971 – 76 [3rd Plan] 47.52 42.66 90%
1976 – 81 [4th Plan] 110.62 85.3 77%
1981 – 87 [5th Plan] 444.05 134 30.20%
1987 – 92 [6th Plan] 950 400 42.10%
1992 – 97 [7th Plan] 2350 750 31.90%
1997 – 2002 [8th Plan] 4000 1050 26%
2002-2008 [9th Plan] 8900 2610.14 29.33%
2008-2013 [10th Plan] 14900 3400 23%
2013-2018 [11th Plan] 21300 4500 21%
Source: Embassy of India, Thimphu, Bhutan3
The data shows of the 11 Five Year Plans of Bhutan that have been successfully completed,
India supported 100 per cent for the 1st and 2nd Five Year Plan (i.e. 30.94 Crore INR). However, the
Indian contribution to Bhutan‘s Five Year Plans has been reduced from 1971 to 2018. During 2013-
2018, the lowest contribution has been noted by the Indian government in terms of socio-economic
development for Bhutan.
Indian contribution to Bhutan‘s Five Year Plans mainly covers the Project Tied Assistance (PTA)
which funds 71 mutually agreed projects like agriculture, ICT, education, medical sciences, media,
health, roads, urban development, judiciary, civil aviation, energy, road safety and transportation,
constitutional offices and media, labour and human resource development and so on (Choden, 2004).
India‘s assistance also covers some Small Development Projects (SDP). These include community-
oriented programmes, drinking water schemes, infrastructure in rural regions, irrigation channels etc.
Moreover, India also grants and supports hydropower generation and other infrastructure.
Some of the major projects in Bhutan are undertaken with Indian assistance (Bisht, 2010; Choden,
2004). These include the 1020 MW Tala Hydroelectric Project, 60 MW Kurichhu Hydroelectric Project
and 336 MW Chukha Hydroelectric Project. In addition, Paro airport, Penden cement plant, major
highways, electricity transmission and distribution system, Bhutan Broadcasting Station, Indo-Bhutan
3 https://www.indembthimphu.gov.in/pages.php?id=4
9
microwave link, survey and mapping and exploration of mineral resources are also funded by the
government of India.
India and Bhutan: A Contemporary Analysis
Notwithstanding geographical and political-economic difficulties, India and Bhutan have consistently
supported and stood by one another. In fact, they have been encouraged to make amicable alliances
and close relationships due to this trust. As a trustworthy neighbour, Bhutan never played the China
card, unlike other neighbouring countries (Stobdan, 2014). Nepal and other neighbouring countries
have several times criticised India‘s hydropower, border management and foreign policies, but Bhutan
has not criticised India so far (Bisht, 2012; Ranjan, 2018). Instead, India and Bhutan together mutually
solved the many problems and misunderstandings.
Geo-strategically, Bhutan has also supported and helped India whether during the war of Sino-
India in 1962 or the Indo-Pakistan war of 1971. In return, India also helped Bhutan by voting in favour
of its United Nations membership in 1971. Similarly, China is aware that Bhutan‘s external affairs has
been guided by India during the period. Therefore, China strategically voted in favour of Bhutan for UN
membership in order to make Bhutan independent in taking decisions for its own external affairs. In
addition, China also wanted to build a good relationship with Bhutan so that China can reduce the
influence of India on Bhutan. However, the historical friendship between India and Bhutan, Article 2 of
the 1949 (Peace and Friendship Treaty) and geographical constraints between China and Bhutan have
always become an obstacle for China. Bhutan got approved for UN membership in 1971. This
membership helped to open the door for the international organisation to provide some financial
support and economic development assistance in terms of socio-economic and environmental
development in Bhutan.
After becoming a member of the United Nations in 1971, Bhutan started to advocate
diplomatic relations for its national interests and has worked to forge stronger ties with neighbouring
countries in order to advance its economic growth. In fact, in the same year, Bhutan also declared its
independent status as a sovereign country. In addition, Bhutan established diplomatic relations with
Dhaka and strengthened its diplomatic relations in New Delhi to full sovereign status (Stobdan, 2014).
However, on many international occasions, it has been observed that Bhutan has taken a different
stand opposite to India and supported China and Pakistan. For instance, the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM) and the Havana Conference of 1979. Similarly, Bhutan also signed the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) in 1985 that supported Pakistan's proposal for a Nuclear-Free
Zone in South Asia. Further, Bhutan has also withdrawn from the multi-lateral vehicle agreement that
includes Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, and Nepal, which was signed under SAARC in June 2015 to
regulate passenger, personal, and vehicular cargo traffic. Therefore, Bhutan started to make a stand on
its own in terms of external affairs.
In addition, the Government of Bhutan also put pressure on India to solve the issues of
borders (Assam and Bengal Duars etc.) between India and Bhutan in 1979. In 1976, Sikkim‘s monarchy
system was ended and Sikkim opted to be included in India. This incident triggered unease among the
people of Bhutan that it would become the next Sikkim (Rajput, 2014). Further, Bhutan also started
10
pressurising the government of India for updating the Treaty of 1949, especially Article 2 according to
which India‘s guidance was important for Bhutan‘s external affairs. In 2007, after realising the
seriousness of the situation, India agreed to the amendment and revoked Article 2 of the 1949 treaty
and relieved Bhutan of its responsibilities to seek India's guidance on external affairs that included the
need to obtain permission for the import of weapons, among other things (Nga et al., 2019).
Surprisingly, in 2007, Bhutan became a democratic country. The King of Bhutan directed that a
general election be conducted. For the first time, the government was chosen by the citizens of Bhutan.
Jigme Yozer Thinley was elected as the first Prime Minister of Bhutan. He was progressive and started
to build diplomatic ties with neighbouring countries and other nations. His DPT (Druk Phuensum
Tshogpa) government successfully developed diplomatic relations with 25 nations in 2011 and 53 more
in 2013 (Stobdan, 2014). Until 2007, Bhutan used to seek the advice of India in terms of external affairs
but after the updation of Article 2 of 1949 in 2007, Bhutan‘s DPT government actively worked for
creating diplomatic ties with neighbouring countries including Pakistan and China. Consequently, Bhutan
gradually started to shift away from its Indian-centric foreign policy that created a distance between
Thimphu and New Delhi (Bisht, 2012).
The new democratic Bhutan was seeking all possible ways of economic development for
Bhutan. The DPT government wanted to explore foreign policy and reduce the dependency on India.
For that, it established diplomatic relations with more than 75 neighbouring and other countries from
2007 to 2013 (Stobdan, 2014). These steps surely created a gap between India and Bhutan, but the
real gap appeared in Indo-Bhutan relations when Bhutan‘s closeness to China increased in 2012 with an
agreement for buying 20 buses from China. In fact, Bhutan‘s Prime Minister Thinley met with Chinese
Premier Wen Jiabao in Rio de Janeiro in June 2012. This news triggered apprehension in New Delhi
which accused Thimphu of lacking transparency and of developing the practice of keeping India in the
dark about things affecting their common security (Stobdan, 2014). Despite this, India again backed
Bhutan during the rupee crunch in Bhutan in 2012. During this financial crisis, India again played a big
brother role to support Bhutan by providing a 10 billion credit line with an interest of 5 per cent per
annum (Bisht, 2012). After the BJP government came into power in 2014, Prime Minister of India
Narendra Modi started to strengthen foreign policy with India‘s neighbouring countries. His first visit
was to Bhutan and led to agreements on many issues like security, trade, socio-economic development,
education etc. Presently, both India and Bhutan are enjoying a friendly relationship with each other and
backing each other in every strategic situation and decision.
Conclusion
Without a doubt, India is a big player in South Asian geopolitics and tries to maintain good relationships
with all South Asian nations. However, Chinese foreign policies always try to attract and influence South
Asian states by providing loans, grants, development projects, arms and amenities and so on. Evidently,
Sri Lanka, Maldives, Pakistan, Nepal, Afghanistan and Bangladesh already have experienced the Chinese
development policies and its consequences. These Chinese development policies have also attracted
Bhutan, but it has always stood with the government of India and its policies. It has also been observed
that Bhutan wants to have its own diplomatic relations independently without any geopolitical pressure
11
from the neighbouring countries. However, as Chinese influence is increasing in South Asia, Bhutan also
may be attracted by such development policies. Bhutan‘s closeness with China surely creates a distance
between India and Bhutan which geopolitically and strategically will be a big loss for India. Therefore,
the Indian development model for Bhutan needs to be made flexible and feasible to the benefit of both
countries. In addition, India needs to update its foreign policy and development policies accordingly not
only for maintaining a healthy geopolitical relationship but also to make a hegemonic stronghold in
South Asia. This would be the only counter or response against the increasing influence of China in
South Asian neighbouring countries.
References
Bisht, M (2012). The Rupee Crunch and India-Bhutan Economic Engagement. IDSA Issue Brief, New
Delhi.
————— (2010). India-Bhutan relations: From developmental cooperation to strategic partnership.
Strategic Analysis, 34(3), 350–353.
————— (2012). Bhutan–India power cooperation: Benefits beyond bilateralism. Strategic Analysis, 36
(5): 787-803.
Choden, T (2004). Indo-Bhutan relations recent trends. Perspectives on Modern South Asia–A Reader in
Culture, History, and Representation, 298-302.
Debnath, S (2010). The Dooars in Historical Transition. Siliguri: N L Publishers.
Eden, A, Pemberton, R B and Bose, K K (1865). Political missions to Bootan. Printed at the Bengal
Secretariat Office.
Gait, E (1906). A History of Assam. Thacker, Spink & Company.
Kohli, M (1982). India and Bhutan: A Study in Interrelations. Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers
Pvt. Ltd.
Malik, A H and Sheikh, N A (2016). Changing dynamics of Indo-Bhutan relations: Implications for India.
International Journal of Political Science and Development, 4 (2): 44-53.
Murthy, P (1999). Indo-Bhutan relations: Serving mutual interests. Strategic Analysis, 23 (1): 121-36.
Nga, L T H, Hiep, T X, Thuy, D T and Huyen, H L (2019). India–Bhutan treaties of 1949 and 2007: A
retrospect. India Quarterly, 75 (4): 441-55.
Penjore, D (2004). Security of Bhutan: Walking between the giants. Paper written for Asia Pacific Center
for Security Studies (APCSS), Honolulu, Hawaii.
Phuntsho, K (2013). The History of Bhutan. Gurgaon: Random House India.
Rajput, M (2011). Indo-Bhutan Relations through Prism of History. New Delhi: Manak Publication Pvt.
Ltd.
————— (2014). Indo-Bhutan Relations: A Critical Analysis. The Indian Journal of Political Science,
149-156.
Ranjan, A (2018). India-Bhutan hydropower projects: Cooperation and concerns. Singapore: Institute of
South Asian Studies.
Rathore, L S (1974). The Changing Bhutan. Jain Brothers.
Rennie, S (2005). Bhutan and the Story of War. Varanashi: Pilgrim Publishing.
12
Samaranayake, N (2019). China's engagement with smaller South Asian countries (pp. 15-16).
Washington: United States Institute of Peace.
Sen, S (2015). Indo-Bhutan Relations (1774-1907). Kolkata: Mainstream Publication.
Sharma, R and Lal, J (2017). Indo-Bhutan Trade Relations: An Analysis. International Journal of
Academic Research, 45-48.
Shubham (2014). Understanding India–Bhutan relations. Retrieved from https://www.
oneindia.com/feature/understanding-india-bhutan-relations-1467521.html
Stobdan, P (2014). India and Bhutan: The strategic imperative. Institute for Defence Studies &
Analyses.
Taneja at el (2019). Indo-Bhutan Economic Relations. Working Paper-384, ICRIER.
White, J C (1971). Sikkim and Bhutan. London, 1909. reprint, New Delhi. Pp 264-65.
13
Recent Working Papers
503 COVID-19 Pandemic and Primary 518 Biodiversity and Ecosystem Governance
Education in India: Does It Cause More in Indian Protected Areas: A Case Study
Inequality Between Public and Private from Manas in Assam
Schools? Michael Islary and Sunil Nautiyal
Indrajit Bairagya, S Manasi and Roshan Thomas
519 Coresidence of Older Persons in India: Who
504 Social Capital and Tapping Community- Receive Support and What are the Levels
Based Organisation’s Convergence of Familial Support?
Potential with MGNREGA: A Micro Study in Kinkar Mandal and Lekha Subaiya
Karnataka
520 India’s Trade in Dirty Products
Sanjiv Kumar and S Madheswaran
Malini L Tantri and Varadurga Bhat
505 Benchmarking of Bangalore Water Supply
521 Education and Nutrition among the
and Sewerage Board (BWSSB)
Migrant Construction Workers’ Children –
Kavya Shree K and Krishna Raj
A Case Study of Bengaluru City
506 Is Public Education Expenditure Pro- Channamma Kambara, Malini L Tantri, S Manasi
cyclical In India? and N Latha
Ramanjini and K Gayithri
522 Performance of Piety: Lived Experiences
507 Nutrition Status and Socio-Economic of Muslim Women
Inequality Among Children (0-59 Months) Romica Vasudev and Anand Inbanathan
Across Different Geographical Regions of
523 Changing Forest Land Use for Agriculture
Uttar Pradesh, India
and Livelihood in North East India
Prem Shankar Mishra and Himanshu Chaurasia
Reimeingam Marchang
508 Determinants of Foreign Direct
524 Fiscal Federalism: Transfer Dependency
Investment in theIndian Pharmaceutical
and Its Determinants Among Select
Industry with Special Reference to
Indian States
Intellectual Property Rights: Evidence
J S Darshini and and K Gayithri
from a Time-Series Analysis (1990-2019)
Supriya Bhandarkar and Meenakshi Rajeev 525 Essentiality of Package of Practices (PoPs)
of Tomato Cultivation in Semi-arid Region
509 Policy and Performance of Agricultural
of Karnataka – A Bird’s Eye View
Exports in Inida
M Govindappa
Malini L Tantri
526 Job-Seeking Behaviour, Employment,
510 The Abysmal State of Drug Cost
Labour Employability Skills, Dissatisfaction
Containment Measures in India: Evidences
and Job Mobility: A Study of North-East
from Expenditure on Cancer Medicine
Migrant Workers in Bengaluru
Sobin George, Arun Balachandran and
Reimeingam Marchang
Anushree K N
527 Socio-Economic Characteristics and Land
511 Peace-Building and Economic
Particulars of Ginger Farmers in Karnataka
Development through Decentralization:
Pesala Peter and I Maruthi
The Pre-Bifurcation Jammu and Kashmir
Experience 528 How Civic Groups are Meeting the
Sardar Babur Hussain Challenges of Saving Bengaluru Lakes: A
Study
512 The Policy and Performance of Industrial
Dipak Mandal and S Manasi
Sector in Karnataka
Malini L Tantri and Sanjukta Nair 529 Revisiting India’s SEZs Policy
Malini L Tantri
513 Infrastructure Led Livelihood: A
Comparative Analysis of Hill and Valley in 530 TATA Motors Singur: Narratives of
Manipur Development Projects, Politics and Land
T Thangjahao Haokip and Marchang Acquisition in West Bengal
Reimeingam Pallav Karmakar and V Anil Kumar
514 Indian Startup Ecosystem: Analysing 531 Migration, Reverse Migration,
Investment Concentration and Employment and Unemployment Crises
Performance of Government Programmes During the First Wave of COVID-19
Fakih Amrin Kamaluddin and Kala Seetharam Pandemic in India
Sridhar Reimeingam Marchang
515 Effects of Covid-19 Pandemic on the Rural 532 Women, Employment and Stigma of Crime:
Non-farm Self-employed in India: Does Narratives of Former Female Convicts
Skill Make a Difference? From West Bengal
Indrajit Bairagya Shreejata Niyogi
516 Promoting Green Buildings towards 533 Cost Benefit Analysis of System of Wheat
Achieving Sustainable Development Intensification Method of Cultivation Vis-
Goals: A Review à-Vis the Traditional Method: A Case
S Manasi, Hema Nagaraj, Channamma Kambara, Study of Gaya, Bihar
N Latha, O K Remadevi and K H Vinaykumar Shikha Pandey
517 Indian Civil Aviation Industry: Analysing 534 Did Skill Development Policies Promote
the Trend and Impact of FDI Inflow Participation in and Benefits from Skill
Priyanka Saharia and Krishna Raj Education? Evidence from a Nation-wide
Survey
Andrea Vincent and D Rajasekhar
535 Implications of Infrastructure on Human 548 Religion and State in Sikkim: The Place of
Development in North East India: A the Buddhist Sangha
Review Pooja Thapa and Anand Inbanathan
T Thangjahao Haokip and Reimeingam Marchang
549 Time Allocation and Gender Inequalities:
536 Domestic Violence Against Women – A A time-use Comparison
Case Study and the Role of Civil Societies Jyoti Thakur and Reimeingam Marchang
from the Sundarbans Region of West
550 Agrarian Distress: Role of Political
Bengal
Regimes in Kerala
Anamika Das and C M Lakshmana
Ance Teresa Varghese
537 Impact of Skill Development
551 Assessing Commuter’s Willingness to Pay
Infrastructures: A Study of Manipur
to Reduce Traffic Congestion Induced Air
T Thangjahao Haokip and Reimeingam Marchang
Pollution in Bengaluru, India
538 Why Do Farmers Not Adopt Crop Insurance Vijayalakshmi S and Krishna Raj
in India?
552 Nutritional Status of Women and Children
Meenakshi Rajeev
in North Eastern States
539 Comprehending Landslides, MGNREGS and Malini L Tantri, Channamma Kambara and Harshita
Decentralised Government: A Study in Bhat
Sikkim and Darjeeling
553 Requiem to Enlightenment? Gadamer and
Shikha Subba
Habermas on Tradition, Religion,
540 Locating Married Women in Urban Labour Secularism and Post-Secularism
Force: How India is Faring in 21st Century Anil Kumar Vaddiraju
Jyoti Thakur and and Reimeingam Marchang
554 Estimation of Productivity Loss Due to
541 A Critical Study on the Impact of ICT on Traffic Congestion: Evidence from
Interactive Service Workers in the Hotel Bengaluru City
Industry Vijayalakshmi S and Krishna Raj
Jina Sarmah
555 Swachh Bharat Mission: Awareness
542 Intergenerational Transfers in India: Who Strategies, Implementation and Issues
Receives Money and Who Gives Money? D Rajasekhar and R Manjula
Kinkar Mandal and Lekha Subaiya
556 Agriculture Value Chain Governance in the
543 Karnataka Administration: A Historical Context of Select Agricultural Export
Review Products – Evidence from India
K Gayithri, B V Kulkarni, Khalil Shaha and Malini L Tantri and Sanjukta Nair
R S Deshpande
557 Human Capital and Economic Growth in
544 Understanding the Pathways from India: A Time Series Analysis Using
Victimisation to Offending: Voices from Educational Variables from 1982-2017
the Field Surendra Kumar Naik and Indrajit Bairagya
Shreejata Niyogi
558 How are Cancer Treatment Decisions
545 Civic Activism in Urban Waste Made? Insights from a Qualitative Study
Management in Bengaluru City, India Conducted Among Selected Cancer
Dipak Mandal and S Manasi Patients in Bengaluru City (India)
Sobin George, Mohamed Saalim P K, Omkar
546 Ward Committees as “Invited Space”: Is
Nadh P, Divyashree H V
It Successful? A Literature Review of
Urban India 559 Doing Business, Trade Facilitation and
Riya Bhattacharya Agricultural Exports in India - The Case of
Select Agricultural Products
547 Service with a Smile: A Study Examining
Malini L Tantri
Interactive Service Work and Workers
(ISW) in India
Jina Sarmah
Price: ` 30.00 ISBN 978-93-93879-28-8
I S E C
NSTITUTEFOR OCIALAND CONOMIC HANGE
(ISEC is an ICSSR Research Institute, Government of India
and the Grant-in-Aid Institute, Government of Karnataka)
Dr V K R V Rao Road, Nagarabhavi P.O., Bangalore - 560 072, India
Phone: 0091-80-23215468, 23215519, 23215592; Fax: 0091-80-23217008
E-mail: balasubramanian@isec.ac.in; Web: www.isec.ac.in